Thank you, uh, ministers for being here.
We have you for half an hour.
Uh, so what I might do is, um, give you an opportunity
to make some brief open statements
and then we'll move to questions from members.
Sure. Uh, look, I'll just start by, well
make sure everyone comes in.
Obviously you've, you've got associate here,
we've got the, um, Simon Mood and Matt from ko.
I think you've got session with them later.
We've got Brad and the team from Hub
and, um, range of other people.
Uh, for, for your sessions.
I suppose just probably two points to start with, um,
but I think just worth highlighting, um, first is, uh,
government's kind of central policy on housing is
is called going for housing growth.
Focuses on the underlying drivers of our,
our housing shortage, our housing crisis, uh, land supply,
uh, infrastructure funding tools and incentives for growth.
Um, land supply is intimately tied up
with Resource Management Act, obviously, and,
and there'll be announcements, um, around, uh,
a new planning system soon.
Uh, and within that new system will be, uh, desire
and uh, ability to create a much more
responsive planning system.
Um, didn't get a lot of attention,
but uh, last week we released, uh, quite a lot
of quite detailed proposals on pillar two, which is
around infrastructure tools.
So there's a consultation, um, uh, piece of legislation, uh,
around development levies, which is a much more flexible way
of, uh, allowing councils
to fund infrastructure moving away from
development contributions.
Devil's in the detail on that stuff.
So we've deliberately published a consultation draft
before we actually introduce it to Parliament
and we want to engage with local government
and development, um, sector around that.
And we've also proposed a regulator of that, which,
which would be the Commerce Commission.
We've also introduced to parliament
and infrastructure funding and financing amendment bill,
which deals with the existing act where we've made a series
of decisions to streamline it
and make it, uh, much more user friendly.
So I didn't get a lot of attention,
but it's actually really important.
'cause as you know, you can unlock land,
but you need the infrastructure tools to,
to actually develop that land.
And then we're working away on pillar
three, which is the incentives.
Um, I have more to say about that in due course very quickly
'cause I know you'll have questions for us both.
The second thing I draw your attention,
which again didn't get a huge amount of attention,
is we've spent quite a lot of time over the last, uh, 12
to 18 months working on a new housing investment system.
And, uh, that is tied to the flexible fund,
which was set up in budget 2025.
Uh, and I, I've been talking about the mantra of,
of right houses and the right place for the right people
with the right support.
And it's about becoming much more granular around
where we invest as a government,
um, building the right set of houses.
Some of you have heard me say this
before, 50% of people on the register need a one bedroom
house or a stock is, for a variety of reasons, only,
only around 12%.
Um, and there are different parts of the country
that have different needs and every part
of the country has different requirements.
And so it's about becoming a much more active purchaser, um,
in government and using the data
and the evidence around where we invest
and then making sure, obviously you've got
the social support in there as well.
And that means working with a range
of providers up and down the country.
So it's quite a big step forward for the system.
I'm, I'm quite proud of it.
Um, didn't get a lot of attention,
as many good things going on often don't.
But, um, I'd encourage you to have a look at that
and you could explore that with hard,
if you want to get into the details of that.
'cause they've done a lot of work on it. We're
that happy to take your questions. Alright,
Great. Thanks minister. Uh, first
question, Kirin, thank you Chair.
Thank you ministers for coming in.
Um, of the houses, the funding
that was announced in budget 24 and budget 25.
So the 1500 in the additional five 50, how many
of those have been completed?
Uh, there's a monthly dashboard, which is public.
Uh, so the latest data I've got in front of me is from
October, uh, 25.
So, um, the November one will be up
very soon if it's not already.
Um, budget 24 social houses 1326 approved,
62 proposed or under evaluation, 115 delivered.
That's from the B 24, B 25 social housing in Auckland.
492 approve 58 proposed
or under evaluation 82, uh, delivered.
Then you've got Maori housing on top of that.
711 contracted 80 delivered that some of
that funding goes back, uh, a bit to be fair.
Um, back to 21, 22, 23.
Um, but that's, um, in delivery as well.
And so you've gotta, you know,
and you can see the regional,
you know, the regional breakdown as well.
There's quite a big pipeline stuff coming.
So, of the funding, just to clarify that, of the funding
and budgets,
twenty four, twenty five, a hundred ninety seven
have been completed?
Yeah. 'cause the funding came on stream and,
and, um, obviously, uh, first of,
probably 1st of July 24, so.
Okay. You know, takes, takes the time to build things. Yeah,
Understood. Just keen
to understand how many have been completed.
So the, uh, 1500 were due to be done by 30th of June 27th
and the 550 in 25 20 sixth year.
Yes. Are you still on track to do that?
Uh, yes. That's the advice I've had, um, subject
to the fact that things move around a bit
and, you know, there'll be some stuff
that will inevitably slip.
That's the nature of construction.
Some of the feedback, um, that I'm sure Ka Ora may mention
to you is that they are struggling with consenting,
for example, with councils.
And there have been delays in some projects
because they are having difficulties with, uh,
council consents, which just proves the point
around the importance of RMA reform
because the RMA doesn't just affect the private sector,
it also affects public entities like CO
or, and CHIPS as well. So
Your advice is that it's on track?
Uh, well, broadly on track.
I mean, we are, we are monitoring it.
Um, there will, as I say, I'm,
I'm a realist about these things.
There is always the inevitable risk of slippage.
Um, and, uh, you know, the timeframes are as they are
and we, we try and hold providers to, to delivery tracks for
that, uh, and make sure they deliver When they sell,
they'll do, but, you know,
inevitably some, sometimes things slip.
We got a document today through an OIA
that you received in August
that says you're not on track quite clearly.
Um, it says on this is the 21st of August,
it's an aid memoir from the ministry, uh,
with an annex a risks to the 1500 delivery.
And it quite clearly shows that only 337 set
to be delivered in financial year 25, 26, uh,
609 financial year 26 27.
But 462 of those are after the deadline
Of 30 June 27.
It still doesn't add up Yeah.
To the amount that you funded.
Well, as I say, as I say,
there's always the risk of slippage.
We'll be, we'll be working hard
to make sure those houses are delivered,
but I don't control consenting
and I also don't control construction sector.
Uh, you know, the,
the way in which things are delivered all the way.
All I can do is approve the funding
and, um, hold people's feet to the flame
and make sure they get on with it. But
In fairness, I asked you, are you on track?
And you literally said yes. That's the advice. I,
I say broadly on track,
but there's always the risk of slippage.
And I, I don't have that I
and that document in front of me that you do.
Um, but, um, you know, doubt we go, we up
Happy to give it to you.
Well, we got it as an i i a this morning.
Okay. That's All for you. Supplementary to
Killer. Um,
my question is around the common order reset
that's been happening over the last year
and the report that came out earlier in the year,
it was interesting to me that, um, with, um, bil English,
uh, conducting the reset review,
and then more recently he's come out, um,
co-signing the New Zealand initiative report
around owning less to achieve more.
So given his role in both of these pieces of work,
and given your selection of him
to carry out the kind water reset,
is there an intention from the government for the state to
step back from providing public housing?
No, I wouldn't, I wouldn't read that into, I mean,
I think you're conflating a number
of different things there, to be honest,
but, so no, I I would reject that.
Um, one of the, uh, one of the, uh,
the key objectives of the government is to make sure
that the public provision of, uh, social
and affordable housing is much more effective than
what it has been, uh, in the past.
Um, we've just, uh,
published the housing investment strategy as I,
as I said in my preparatory remarks,
which sets a really clear objective
that the housing investment by the government is there
to provide safe and secure shelter, uh,
for those who need it most.
And there will always be a role
for government in relation to that.
So we can do, we can fix, we can,
we can fix our land markets,
we can create competitive urban land markets,
and we can create a flexible infrastructure funding system.
We will do all that. And that if we can do that properly,
it will be transformational for prosperity in this country.
It's one of what, one
of the reasons why it's the government's driving ambition
to fix our housing crisis.
However, there will always be, even, even if we deal with
that, there will always be, uh, people who slip
through the cracks of the social services.
Um, one of the areas I'm particularly passionate about is,
is, and which I know you are too, is prisoners
who leave prison and bounce out
of the corrections facilities and often have nowhere to go
and inevitably end up committing crime
and end up back in the prison system.
And, um, I would like to see us as a country do
far more for those people.
'cause the most expensive form
of social housing the government provides is prison.
Yeah. It's the most expensive roof over
someone's head you can possibly do.
So anyway, that's a slight digression,
but that might sort of makes my point, which is
that there will always be people, people
with addiction challenges, people with mental health,
people leaving prison, um, people, youth justice facilities
and or, or just on the simple grounds of unaffordability,
there will always be people
who the government should step in to support.
And the so that, that's not a, that's not up for debate.
That is, that is government policy and always will be.
The question is what is the most
effective form of that support?
And, and I reject the view
that the government has to do everything.
We, we can work with the Salvation Army, we can work
with our fantastic community housing
providers up and down the country.
Uh, we can work with iwi, we can work with, uh,
Maori land trusts, some of whom do a fantastic job.
There's, there's a whole range of different people we,
we can and should work with, with government money.
Um, it doesn't have to be all delivered by the state.
So that's kind of my perspective on
Things. Yeah, totally agree with your, your,
your points around the,
um, people coming outta prisons.
Um, just quickly on the, the comments you were making
around consenting and the challenges kind
of water are having with consenting Totally agree.
Councils need to be way quicker
and more efficient at processing those.
There is a consent, um,
that is active in Wellington Central, as you know,
that is about to expire soon for 300 public homes.
Arlington this time. Yep.
This time last year you told me
that there was gonna be an answer coming for that
and, um, been in touch with some
of the housing providers locally,
then they're also waiting for an answer.
Yeah. So what's going on?
'cause that's about to expire and that's $50 million
of taxpayers money.
Yeah. About to go down the drain. If we don't do something.
All I'll say to you, Tam,
is good things come to those who, wait,
Wait, how long? How long do I have
To wait? Well, as, as I
think, you know, um, we,
it was a very difficult situation we
inherited there with Arlington.
Um, the initial budget from memory was two 96 million
for 300 social apartments.
So it's a million bucks per apartment.
It's quite a bit of money. It's a
very challenging site to build on.
Uh, then, then the later business case came in
and was it 4 23, Matt?
4 23 for two? It was substantially above, yeah.
A better election for the detail than I didn't, yeah,
I think, I think substantially we, we can check the numbers,
but it's, it was about 420 million, four,
300 social apartments
and the, um, so even more so it's a lot of money.
Uh, and you know, that that money buys a lot
of other houses in, in other parts of the country.
So anyway, um, we need it here.
So that's, that, that got rejected by the LA even
that was too much for the last government.
So that got rejected and we've been, we've been looking at
what we do with the site, acknowledge
and acknowledge your advocacy for it.
Um, and we we're making progress also, um,
complications and challenges
because it, uh, is actually Wellington City Council land,
uh, k has a lease from the city council.
And, um, uh, so it,
it's, I get what you're saying.
It's not quite as simple as, you know, sea Land built.
It's not, not quite as simple as that.
If only that was true supplementary or
Nce. Oh, thanks Mr.
Chair.
And to be fair, the ministers, I started
to answer my supplementary.
Um, given your expectation around the delivery of homes
to be contributed by a community, um, in the private sector,
are you able to tell us about the benefits
of the delivery from that sector and what you envision?
Yeah, I think, I think what I'd say is, um, it, it,
it depends, right?
So in some parts of the country, KA or is the game in town,
and, and we, you know, they,
they play a very important role.
Um, lower hu for example, I think about my own electric.
Um, you know, the government owns I think 3,800
or maybe 3,900 homes, um, in, in lower hut.
So K is a very important social provider
in other parts of the country.
Um, you haven't had KO as active there and,
and chips of the game in town, um, or,
or there's a combination.
And so it really is a bit horses for courses.
Um, if I think about the far north, for example, there's,
there's a range of providers in the far north
and one of the new, uh, goals
of the housing investment system is
to actually really focus on building new homes in the far
north where we know there is severe housing deprivation
and severe housing need.
And that's gonna involve working with a range of providers
and also the government stepping back
and saying, well, you know what, if someone comes to us,
comes to us with a bright idea, uh, we can work with you.
The, and that's the beauty
of the flexible fund is what we used to have, right?
Was all of these like funding buckets
and people were, were organizing their, um, applications
around these narrow pots of money.
And that's sort of the wrong way of doing it.
What actually we should be doing is saying, look, here's a,
there's a bunch of money here, here are the needs.
Here's where we're investing, here's where we are targeting,
here's the type of people we wanna be getting into.
Warm dry houses. You, you design your solutions based
around the fact that there's maximum flexibility
for you rather than sort of segmenting it in different ways.
So that's the great, the great step forward.
We've taken, I mean, early days,
we've only launched it like two weeks ago, so, you know,
hold me to account in a year's time,
but I, I do genuinely think it's a,
it's a good progressive way forward.
No pressure. Maureen. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm interested in, um, as you've already alluded to,
you know, the solution is
to get more houses built everywhere,
but, um, how does the ministry assess
the need going forward?
Yeah, because there's, there's no, you know,
when you consider population change and Yeah.
Changes in RMA and yeah.
And also geographically where the needs
Are. Yeah, I,
I'd encourage you to get into that with hud.
Um, 'cause they can get, they've done quite a lot
of work on this and they can give you, um, all
of the analysis, but at a high level, what they've,
there's multiple sources of data, right?
For all this stuff, you know, um,
it's probably actually arguably too much data.
But what they've done is look at, uh, the housing register,
um, and where, you know,
'cause we, we break that down by region.
And so these, and they've looked at a variety
of different metrics in order
to determine where the need is.
And what that analysis shows is that, you know, the most,
the most need at the moment is the far north.
It's, uh, the Eastern Bay of Plenty, for example,
where you've got quite a stress rental market, um,
people on the register, people in need, and, um, they,
but they can take you through all of the metrics there.
And we've also, the, the team have also gone out
and actually visited all each of the regions.
'cause you've gotta, you can have the data and stuff,
but you've actually gotta sense
check it with people on the ground.
So I said to them, look, don't just take the,
the raw numbers you gotta go out on, get on the ground
and actually talk to the people who are doing,
doing the work on the ground.
Mm. Um, 'cause you've, sometimes you've gotta crosscheck it.
Like for example, we know
that the housing register in the far north, for example,
almost certainly does not capture the need
of the, the housing need up there.
There's people aren't on the register, um, for a variety
of different reasons, which is a whole other conversation.
But, you know, we know that that's the case
or we almost certain that's the case. Yeah.
So just to follow on from that, that's current need. Yes.
Um, I'm talking long term need. Yes.
Like how, how do you know how to plan Yeah.
And fund for the long term.
Yeah. Well that's exactly right.
And that's, and that's, that's, I would, I would classify
that as a work in progress.
Um, and, uh, where I would like to take, I mean,
that's let's, before we can run,
but, uh, where I would like to take the system as we,
as we build it over time, is, um, a, a, a much, uh,
well build building in the projections, um, to the extent
that that you can, but then also looking at
that greater level of granular, granular granularity
around social support.
Um, because it's, it's fine to provide a house
and it's good, but it's the support that comes with it
and integrating that into the way in which we commission
and procure services.
And there's a whole other conversation which, you know,
probably don't have time for today, but I would like,
I would like to drive it, drive us towards,
because we know, for example, that, that there's a range
of cohorts out there.
This gets into the social investment space.
There's a range of cohorts out there
where it just makes sense to, you know, wrap support
around people and get them off the streets,
get them into warm dry houses, get the support required, um,
on, on fiscal cost alone, let alone the waste
of human potential from not doing that.
Um, but that, that is, that is quite complicated
and, and quite complex.
Um, and, and we're not there yet,
but, you know, set your sites high.
Okay, Anna. Great. Let's talk about homelessness. Okay.
Um, so where do we start?
Let's start with, um,
let's start with you young people.
Yes. Um, in the last this week, the support's come out,
this is the State of the Streets report by Aaron Hendry,
kickback, um, make Change mm-hmm.
160 young people through their door looking
for housing support in the last year.
Mm-hmm. So also this one more than a home
that's come out from Akhi,
which they're launching in tonight.
Mm-hmm. There is no youth transitional housing in ua, Napier
Topo Gisborne Re or the North Shore.
What is the government's response
to increasing youth homelessness?
And what are you saying to young people who come to ask
for support and why are some
of those young people being denied access?
Look, uh, I think Bish
and I might have a couple of comments each, but first
and foremost, uh, there are some very significant
concerning challenges, uh, for people sleeping rough
and for people homelessness.
And we recognize those, and that's,
of course formed the basis
of the Homelessness Insights report
that everyone got in June, July.
And we've obviously taken some steps. Could you?
Right. There's severe, uh, housing deprivation
and quite a degree
of homelessness in different places throughout the country.
And youth homelessness, uh, is not adjacent to that.
It's actually part of, uh, some
of the severe housing deprivation that people are facing.
There are some providers, uh,
and some people out there doing stealing job.
Uh, obviously Aaron's involved in some of that.
So as Ma Mahi, ma Mahi Joyce and Hamilton
and other places, there have been some funded places.
But we recognize that there's some real challenges.
And part of that is course Whanau disconnect
and some other challenges, whether
or not the mental health or otherwise.
Uh, and the most recent announcements in December, some of
that money got allocated out to ma uh, to help support
with some transitional housing in Tamaki Makoto.
Uh, is it enough?
Well, we'll see how that goes,
but certainly we've been really, um, uh, en encouraged
by that they've got that pier allocated out
to different entities and organizations who are there
to support not just youths, but actually all whanau
and others that are facing the severe housing deprivation.
Uh, has there been, uh, progress in some places?
Probably yes. In some places it's a bit harder, uh,
and continue to receive those materials.
Like what, I haven't actually seen that report.
Aaron's very, uh, vocal, uh,
and raising awareness around that.
And I know Minister Bishop and myself have been to visit him
and others like Mahera.
And, um, just on that, while I've got you both here,
there are a, there, there seems to be a group of Auckland,
uh, based government mps
who are working on their Auckland CBD
moving on homeless people.
Um, and I wanted to know, and,
and the word on the street is
that you tamma have warned housing providers that they need
to get as many people off the streets as possible
before police come in and start moving homeless people on.
So what advice are you both providing
to this Auckland Ministerial advisory group who want
to lock up homeless people?
Well, I think what's, what's, what, what's, uh,
absolutely clear is that recently we
recognize the genuine concerns that have been expressed
by members of our house, uh, but also by housing providers
and other advocates within the cities
and elsewhere about people sleeping on the street,
rough sleeping and other challenges.
And so we took action as a result,
and one of those actions was
to announce 300 additional funded places for housing first
providers in the fall centers, Auckland, Wellton,
Christchurch, and Hamilton, and allocated across there.
And what we found out along the way also, is that some
of the providers actually had funded places
that they hadn't filled up to 130 of them
that they were sitting on,
and nothing was being done about it.
So it's important for them to actually go out
and fulfill their contractual responsibilities
to support people that are doing it tough
to get into funded housing places.
The ones that existed before our announcement and the 300
after announcement, there have been some challenges,
of course, renting
or leasing houses from private landlords
to make sure they've got the available supply so
that they can help people who are sleep in rough get in
and who are in the Housing first
program, get into those homes.
We also gave that, uh, support for $10 million
of transitional housing, which I just
mentioned earlier before.
Uh, there have been, uh, uh, some, uh, cordal
around, uh, move on orders.
It's certainly, uh, something that you've, uh, alleged.
Others have said that I've said,
and I deny that I don't agree with that at all.
What I've said is we absolutely have to focus on people
that are sleeping rough.
The CBD obviously is a very important part of the country
and all because it's 8% of GDP,
but it's got a whole bunch of human potential
that's unrealized, uh, people
that are sleeping rough on the side of the streets,
down the city street all over the place.
And there's a range of housing providers, uh,
others like Maori wardens, we're all trying to work together
to resolve and help, um,
support those people in genuine need.
That's what they're doing.
That's what they're doing right now.
We've had a meeting this week,
I think we've got another one in a couple of weeks
with a variety of public, uh, private
and, um, community organizations to try
and deal with these really challenging issues.
In addition to that, we've got, uh, these houses
that have been built for social housing
and by community housing providers in Auckland, which
a member McNulty mentioned before, Ty, pardon, McNulty
and McNulty TI mentioned before.
And, uh, a whole bunch of, uh, folks
that are genuinely interested in actually helping support
and relocate some of their Iwi members to other parts
of the country, uh, where they're from.
So, supplementary ki Thank you.
Um, do you accept
that homelessness has increased in the last 12 months?
Uh, I think it depends on where you're talking about.
Um, it's, it's, it, it, like, it's a,
it's a varied regional picture.
Um, all I'd say is,
is there's no doubt we have housing challenges in this country.
And, um, you know, it's, as I say, it's one
of the government's driving ambitions is
to fix our housing crisis
and homelessness as the, as the, uh, the most visible
and most distressing, uh, element of it.
So we're expecting the next Homelessness Insights
report to come out this month.
Mm-hmm. Yes, I understand. And, uh, those reports
rely in part on feedback from frontline providers.
Every report thus far has
used feedback from frontline providers
to indicate an increase in homelessness.
Mm-hmm. And, uh, whilst the report doesn't say this,
the frontline providers attribute that to policies
of this government, most specifically
around the change in criteria
for entry into emergency housing.
If frontline providers are, uh,
consistently indicating an increase in homelessness,
what data have you got to suggest that that isn't the case?
Yeah, I mean, you know, our views on emergency housing,
which is that, um, uh, it is,
it is not a future we want for New Zealanders
to have people living in motels for months at a time.
Um, the best form of, uh, support we can provide is
to get people into transitional, uh, or into social housing
and wrap support around people.
Um, motel based emergency housing accommodation was an
extremely expensive, counterproductive, um, form of shelter.
Uh, so we have, it's available.
It's, it's gone back to what it was originally intended
to be, which is a, a, um,
Last Resort emergency.
A last resort. It was like the clues in the name,
it was meant to be an emergency.
Um, TAMA can give you the numbers,
which I don't have off the top of my head around, um, people
who approach MSD for, for,
for emergency housing or for shelter.
Um, Tamma give you the numbers around that. Well, with,
With respect Minister, I'm just
conscious we only have four minutes left.
Sure. And, and so my question was specifically
or not so much around emergency housing,
we can ask the officials about that.
Okay. I, I, I wanted to get a response from you
around whether homelessness has
increased in the last 12 months.
I think, I think the response to that speak
That from the frontline providers is
unanimous that it has.
Mm-hmm. So I'd like a response from
That. Okay. So I, I'll
respond to it.
Uh, the Homelessness Insights report said there'd been
reported increase of rough sleeping.
That's what it said. And that the attribution of
that is not down necessarily to a policy change,
but there's a range of factors that contributed to it.
The data that's used in the Homelessness Insights report is
from a variety of sources,
and it is a degree of robustness
depending on what data it is.
For example, some of the data relies on the number
of phone calls the public has made to a council
who then uses those phone calls to, uh, to, to form a number
on how many reports it's got from the public
about people sleeping, homeless.
Now, the robustness of that data to reflect the number
of people actually rough sleeping every night of a month
or every night of a a week, uh, is uh, challenged.
So for us, it's making sure we get, uh, sufficient data,
things where we can form a view,
but importantly take action.
And that's what we've done over the last couple of months,
particularly in those four main centers, but elsewhere. So
You are not homelessness is increasing?
No, I think in some cities it's,
it's probably gone up in
some cities it's probably gone down.
But importantly, we're really trying
to fix the whole housing system
and we're taking action with community housing providers,
many of whom are, remain responsible
and need to be accountable to deliver
on their contracted arrangements to support those in need
for funded places that they have.
So to the, um, young Maori
exited from Emergency housing Minister, do we know
how though they're, they, are they, is that monitored?
Are they tracked? Do we know where they go to? Are you,
So in terms of the Yeah. Confident
That they are well Safe, the numbers when we arrived
were about 3,400, 3,342 in November, 2023
of whanau households that were living in emergency housing.
Uh, and over half Maori, uh, the numbers as
of the last week are around 470 households.
Uh, the number of children that were in emergency, uh,
in December, uh, 23 was about 3000, uh, 430.
Now there's about 320. There's been a huge shift.
Over 3000 kids have come out of emergency housing
and many, many of them are Maori kids.
Of those that came out
and accelerated out through priority one,
just over a thousand households,
735 were Maori households with kids.
All of those that came out through the priority one, uh,
decision making process went straight into social
housing basically.
Uh, we know where around 80 maybe, uh, a little bit more,
maybe a little bit less of people coming out
of emergency housing actually go to,
there are some, we dunno where they go to.
And actually they aren't under no obligation to tell us.
That's probably the percentage or the, it's that number.
If we don't know where they go,
how are they If we don't know?
Well, some of them we don't.
We don't, we don't, we don't trigger.
We we, we're not running out.
We're not running out. They're not running a
Police Statement state. We're not doing that.
No, But they go into social housing.
We know because we pay for it. Yes. Yep.
They go into transitional. We
know 'cause we pay for it. Yeah.
Sometimes We find out
through private rentals the accommodation supplement, but,
but you know, we don't,
we're not running a surveillance state yet.
No. People have gotta have agency.
Alright, we we're at time, so thank you minister.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank
You.
Oh, thank you.
It's given the report could have really wound up people.
What about
Joey
To come?
Surprise, surprise That.
Alright, well, uh, welcome we,
so we move into the end review of, uh, so, um, welcome
to the social services and
Community select committee this afternoon.
I thank you for being here. And uh,
what I'll do is invite you to, um, uh,
make an opening address, um, introduce yourself
and, uh, and go.
And then we'll move to questions from members.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon chairman and members.
Tina Tu. Um, I'm Simon Mutter.
I chair the board of korra and uh, I'm all right.
Matt Crockett, our CEO.
Um, look, when I was here last time, this,
this time last year when we fronted the Select committee,
we literally just submitted our very ambitious claim
or reset plan to the government.
Um, that plan saw us going back to basics
and concentrate our resources on just being a good landlord
who looks after our homes and tenants
and serves communities well,
but also work on our, uh,
long-term financial sustainability.
And it a year on, I'm pleased to confirm
that the reset plan has been executed superbly
by Kor's people.
And we're now moving into the second phase
of our organizational transformation work.
The results of the reset are extraordinary across the board.
Our tenants are more satisfied,
they feel safer in their homes
and they're far less burdened with rent debt.
At the same time. Our underlying operating
and overhead costs are on track to be more than 300 million
lower than FY 24 in this current financial year.
And our peak debt position is going, is tracking
to be more than one
and a half billion lower than the, uh, debt number
that was included in the reset plan
for the same build outcomes.
So all in all, we are running well ahead
of our reset plan targets.
And I think nothing exemplifies that more than the fact
that a year ago we couldn't make enough money on the bottom
line to even cover our interest costs
from our operating earnings.
Whereas this year, FY 26 year, we are on track to cover them
by 1.7 times.
It's a enormous fiscal turnaround.
Um, we've also so solved how
to more cost effectively deliver new social homes
and we're on track by the end of this financial year, uh,
to, to lower our average build per meter cost by
around 15% relative to FY 24,
which means we can provide better homes at lower cost
to the taxpayer in my 35 year career
of leading large organizations to transform and grow.
This is the fastest and most dramatic turnaround
and performance that I've of a large organization
that I've ever been associated with.
Um, and in saying that I want
to truly acknowledge the great work
that Kor's people have done, the hard work
and courageous decisions of my board colleagues.
And to particularly note the outstanding leadership
that Matt Crockett has delivered in his
short, uh, time with us.
Um, he leaves later this month,
but to thank Matt on behalf of New Zealand and the board.
So, but over to you, Matt, to make a few comments to you.
Um, thanks Simon.
And, uh, thank you for giving me the opportunity
to contribute to the reset of Korra.
Um, I decided to accept Simon
and the board's offered to lead our reset
because I knew the work Kaga Aura does is important.
However, it wasn't until I actually started the role
that I fully grasped the scale
and complexity of our operations each year.
Kaga Aura spends billions of dollars
and with over $46 billion of assets under management.
We are one of the biggest asset managers in New Zealand, uh,
about the same as the combined value of those assets managed
by three of New Zealand's largest companies, Fonterra,
infertile, and Meridian Energy.
We have around 78,000 Kaga Aura homes across the MOTU
and house almost 200,000 tenants, which is a little under 4%
of New Zealand's population.
In the 12 months to June, 2025.
Uh, on average we delivered around 16 new
or upgraded homes
for families in need every working day of year.
In turn, every working day, we place about 33 individuals
or families from the housing register into
a kaiga or a home.
So that's about one placement every 15 working minutes.
So Kaga Ora matters. It's why I took the job.
Since then, I've had my team in the organization laser
focused on getting our operations to be as effective
and cost efficient as possible so we can do a better job
for our tenants and communities
and improve our financial performance and sustainability.
As I've said to our people many times, every dollar we waste
or don't spend as efficiently
as possible is a dollar we can't spend on doing our
important social housing mahi.
Over the last 18 months,
we've applied the best practice transformation disciplines.
I've learned leading private sector turnarounds
and transformations internationally
to drive business improvement at Kaga Aura at
pace and scale.
The impact has been larger
and occurred faster than I expected.
And I credit this to the speed
with which Kaga aura's leadership
and wider people got behind the new direction
and adopted these best practice approaches.
It hasn't been an easy journey by any stretch
and our people have done an amazing job
in rising to the challenge.
Now, in terms of outcomes during the reset,
our first priority has been sharpening our operational focus
to drive improved outcomes for our tenants and communities.
We've improved our service delivery
and critically tenant satisfaction has risen across
multiple dimensions.
Uh, improved occupancy rates are a highlight
'cause we need to, to make the most use of the assets
and housing assets that we've got.
We target at least 98% utilization of our available homes.
Uh, and we've managed to reduce vacancy times by 13%.
So families are housed sooner
and fewer homes sit empty in Q1 of FY 26.
This and other changes have allowed us to exceed our target
by about 0.7%
and that equates to about an additional 600 more homes being
tenanted than would be the case if we were just on target.
Now, when you're as big as we are,
small changes in performance can make a big difference.
Uh, we also met our housing supply targets for FY 25
with over 4,300 new
and upgraded homes delivered this year we're on track
to deliver around 2000 new
or retrofitted homes consistent with our reset plan focus,
which is on holding our net housing stock at around
that 78,000 property level while we
renewing our older homes.
And this is really critical given
that half our over half our homes are more than 50 years
old, our bill costs are also trending down.
Average bill costs in FY 24, uh,
was $3,473 per square meter.
Uh, in Q1 FY 26 bill costs had reduced
to $3,290 per square meter,
but contracted bill costs of actual contracts
that we've got moving forward give us a very high confidence
we can hit our end year target of $2,980 per square meter.
Now these and other results have been achieved whilst
tennis satisfaction has improved.
And some examples here are that now we've got 81%
of our tenants that are satisfied
with their home up from 73% a year ago.
87% are satisfied with our maintenance performance,
which is the the highest
satisfaction we've had in three years.
And 87% of tenants feel safe in their homes
and communities up from 74% a year ago.
Looking outta financials,
our efforts have translated into a stronger
financial position and outlook.
At the end of FY 24 kaga Oral was in a financially
unsustainable position due to a combination of poor EBITDA
or operating earnings driven
by poor operating cost control disciplines
and high CapEx spend driven
by excessive build and maintenance costs.
As Simon outlined at the time,
we were not even earning enough to pay our interest costs,
let alone renew housing stock
and eventually pay down our debt through the the reset.
Those issues have been addressed
and we're a mu on a much stronger financial footing.
In FY 25, we exceeded our operating cost savings
by 170 million
for a total underlying operating cost reduction
of $211 million from FY 24.
We've streamlined and right sized our workforce.
FTE numbers have dropped from 3,398 in June, 2024
to 2,285 today.
And those strong underlying cost control disciplines are
enabling rapid EBITDA growth,
which will go from $200 million as it was in 2024.
And we're forecast to exceed $1 billion of EBITDA
during FY 27.
And this is really key for us to be able to service our debt
and finance our renewals.
Again, these changes aren't undermining
service to our tenants.
We are increasing operational performance
and tennis satisfaction over that same period.
In closing, I'd like to stress
that throughout this reset we've kept tenants
at the heart of every decision.
For us, it isn't about numbers
or processes, it's about making sure our tenants have homes
that meet their needs and the support they need to thrive.
Our focus is on delivering better outcomes for the people
and communities who depend on us.
We have passionate, dedicated people at Kanga Aura
who continue to provide great support to our tenants
and communities, and I want to thank them
for their hard mahi.
I'd also like to acknowledge our many partners across many
sectors who work alongside us every day to provide support
and services to the people and whanau in our homes.
This will be my last select committee appearance
as the Chief executive of Kaga Aura, as I'll be handing over
to her incoming chief executive Tracy
Taylor in mid-December.
Tracy's with us today. Tracy joined Kaga Aura a little over
a year ago and she's been a key right hand person to me
as we've executed our reset.
I'm thrilled that the board has chosen her to succeed me.
I'd like to thank the committee for their time today
and we look forward to taking questions.
Well, thank you Russia. I think it's the most pre spoken
same so I've ever heard, but now now it's our time to
Hard questions there ki thank
You. Thank you very much.
Are you able to tell us, uh,
how much Korra has received from the sale of houses?
Uh, yes please.
So during 24 25, um, we've sold 119 homes
and raised $53 million.
That was below our target of 183, uh, homes
and $101 million.
Uh, but part of that was as we were ramping up
and making sure that we had our operational processes right
so that we could manage the tenant side and get that set up.
Um, Congo is on track to meet our full year, uh,
sales volume targets this year.
With average prices currently above forecast, a total
of $99.5 million has been generated year to date
through the sale of 297 homes, um, uh,
at 41.4 million increase since last month.
Uh, and again, we will stress that every dollar
that is freed up by
that is redeployed into renewing our homes, um,
across the Monto.
Uh, and as an example
of why we think this is a sensible approach
to managing our asset base, uh, the one, um,
Ponsonby Villa we sold recently
for $3.4 million frees up enough money
to do more than 12 average retrofits on those
of older houses I talked about.
So we think it's a sensible approach to
managing our asset base and redeploying it to put,
build the right houses and upgrade them in the right place.
Thank you. Uh, can I just clarify please,
you mentioned 53 mil,
that's presumably in the review period,
but the year to date is 99, is that correct? Yeah,
So it was last financial year that it was,
we raised $53 million.
Thank you. Uh, it's year to date, the 99.5. Okay,
That makes sense. 26.
Is that land in sales in addition to that or inclusive?
That's that, sorry, Land sales
in addition to that or inclusive? Uh,
I will just check to make sure
I give you the right figures.
I think in addition to that, this last year,
let me get the exact figures here.
In addition to that last year, uh, so for FY
25, uh, we sold $7.9 million
of land this year.
Year to date, we have sold $2.3 million of land
And the same commitment
around all money from those as redeployed into
100%.
Is that, can that commit commitment also be made
for savings that have been made in your transformation
process or with staff redundancies
Inherently member that they,
unless we are paying a dividend, which we're not,
the money stays inside the business.
So it's, it's capital you are recycling,
operating performance and capital within
Kanga. So none of
the savings that you've made,
I understand it's uh, and please correct me if I'm wrong,
but 420 million
so far across the transformation work streams, you've saved
all of that stays within Korra
and nothing has gone back to the center
or for other purposes outside Korra?
That's correct. It's a, it is partly why the debt cap is
reducing because as we free up earnings,
we need less borrowing.
We, because we can, we can cover that.
So we, you ending up de you, you see
that show up in the debt?
Yeah, the more, the more free cash flow we generate the,
the more we control the debt.
Just to, just to build on Simon's point there, the, um,
this is for versus the reset plan.
So for the same outcomes because that debt cap will be lower
and we've got better operating earnings
and we're redeploying
and using our asset base,
we've got about 300 million less interest costs
to the crown over the same period.
Yeah. Okay. And so the sales go to redeployed into houses,
the savings have gone into repaying dip?
Uh, it's no, I I would say at this point that effectively
what happens is it means that we, um,
are redeploying it all into our renewal
and to paying interest costs.
It's once the we reach the debt cap
that it will actually be going into debt.
Otherwise it's mainly being used to,
to fund short term renewal
And other activities.
168 million for the it um, program,
is that being funded through this as well? That
Is correct. Yep. Right.
Okay. Yeah, so we're redeploying it to do that.
Um, and that will enable us to sort of, again,
better interface with other agencies
and better serve tenants.
But yes, that money is money freed up by our reset.
Okay. Supplementary Helen?
Hi. Um, I have a specific question which is a sub on this.
We have the Wesley project, the labor government put uh,
68 million into that.
Um, some of it was spent
developing the project and then it was stopped.
And my understanding is all that property is up for sale
and won't be used
for the social hang housing that was planned.
What happens to the money um, for that
and the money that was put aside by labor for the project?
Yeah, I uh, I am pretty confident we're not selling
all of Wesley West.
Um, but there has been some reallocation of half funding.
That means we're not building as quickly as was intended.
Um, so that we can double check and confirm that.
And what about the money that was put was allocated for?
It was, it was 68 I think million.
Yeah. So in budget 25 the government announced 125 million
reduction in the half investment for two LSPs Wesley West
and Rosco and Otaki Otay.
So money money's gone back to government. It hasn't stayed
With you. That money
was never in Korra.
It was a drawdown fund from the fund.
We, we managed the process
but the IT set in a fund called the housing
acceleration fund.
That's correct. It wasn't still in the still a housing
acceleration fund. Yeah.
So, uh, well I think the government's decided
to lower the, to redeploy that money.
But you might want to check with HUD when HUD come on later
with exactly what's happened to that.
Yeah, thanks. But for clarity, uh, I,
I don't believe at this point that we're
exiting Wesley West.
We still have properties and land there,
but we are not the the, there was a reallocation
so there's less money coming from the half.
So we're going slower than was.
So my ask on a smaller one, just
so I get a handle on this, there's one in parish, um,
which is a smaller, um, parcel of land
that was flood prone and it's up for sale at the moment.
What will happen to the money from that property?
That was to be KO housing.
If it, if it's our land,
then it will stay within kgo, right?
No, it's being sold at the moment it's on market, yes.
But if it's, but if we sold it and it was our land,
Then the money stays and
that will do what you just described.
Exactly. Correct. Thank you. Yeah.
Sovereign war, Mr. Chair.
So I just wanna understand that debt a little bit more
and how you're addressing it.
Um, the way that you were describing the cap, et cetera,
like, or people that don't understand that, are you meaning
a little bit like offsetting your mortgage in a way
so you pay end up paying less interest on some
of those sell back or can you explain? Well
Let me use the, let me use
the mortgage one 'cause we just use this
'cause Okay. Just,
just to clarify for me.
Just, and those might be watching at home that aren't
Yeah, I let Simon do the technical financial one, but,
but yeah, so Tracy and I just have been around to all our,
most of our offices all around the TU and,
and what I used to bring
to life while we really weren't in a financially sustainable
place, is it's like we've got a home mortgage as a person
and when you take our income
and our living costs, we didn't have enough left
to just pay the interest, let alone pay down the mortgage.
Whereas now because you know, our income has been growing
because we've got rental growth with more properties,
et cetera, and much lower living costs
to use the analogy there, then
that means we've got a lot more operating cash to be able
to pay for our renewals
and we don't have to draw on as much debt,
which in turn means we have less interest.
So you're basically not taking on any much new debt.
Well, just to clarify And that's how you were
managing your debt by not taking them.
That's try and to clarify, in, in budget 23, so
before the reset plan, which is, which is
why the government asked for a review, there were,
there was a lot of growth,
continuing growth in net housing numbers.
So that debt, the debt,
the peak debt in budget 23 was something like 28 billion I
think in round numbers.
The reset plan pulled that back to 22
and change, I think in that order 22 billion
because we've, we are going, we are running to a
set number now and the,
and the government is using carrying on
with promoting extra build with the chip.
That's right. The chip group.
So it wasn't, it's not that there's no net growth,
they're just, they they're focusing that elsewhere.
And so, so what we, we said we would operate inside a target
of around 2022.
We are now confident we are going to be more like 20.
So as at the peak, so the, the debt will stop growing
because we are paying it down.
Assuming we stay on the,
keep the housing stock flat renew roughly
2000 a year. And
that the reason that debt position's improving is,
is um, because we are recycling capital
by selling more unsuitable properties or,
or high value properties recycling capital densifying.
So we can use, we can get four houses on
the same land as one.
Yeah. In the old suburban model.
Um, and the operating efficiency improvements in the
business at being profound.
So they're assisting
and we can see an outlook with
slightly lower interest costs.
Uh, as well. We, our interest cost,
our interest rates are still rising
because we hold, have old hedges favor
that were very favorable coming off.
But the outlook has improved a bit from some
of the plan too, where we had a bit scary a pathway
on interest rates.
So that's, that's helping a little bit too.
Yeah. I still put a question in here
as a supplementary I think, um, basically was going off
that, so it's just can you just clarify again
what you said at the outset, which is you're
a billion dollars lower?
Um, we, we, we we With the same build outcomes.
Yeah. Um, yeah when we,
when we submitted the reset plan a year ago, the debt,
the debt, the peak debt forecast,
uh, contained in that.
Now in our, in our more recent submission,
It's not fully approved through Hi.
Yeah. And HIFU is one and a half billion lower than that.
So, so we've improved even from the reset plan target
on peak debt by a billion and a half
For the same build Outcomes.
So the same exact same outcomes.
And can you just walk us through, you know,
I'm sure there's a lot to that, but just walk us
through some of the key things that enabled you to do that.
Yep, yep. So Shall I cover, so on the, so on the, um,
the two big things are, uh, improved ebitda,
which is mainly coming from better cost control,
which is a combination of big improvements in maintenance.
Um, and the core of
that's been doing the right maintenance at the right time
and doing more actual asset inspection
as opposed to just schedule.
So for example, uh, we would have a roof of
what was 25 years old
or whatever the correct um,
timeframe was we would just replace it.
Whereas now we'll put up a drone, have a look
and go, actually it only needs minor repairs
or it doesn't need anything as an example.
So for that for example,
gave us $123 million year on year reduction in maintenance
costs between FY 24 and FY 25.
So that was a big one.
We also have right sized the workforce.
So as per the FTE numbers I talked about there,
we've got out um, around about a third of the workforce
and some of that was volume
related 'cause we were building less.
Some of it was because our scope had been reduced
to focus back, but to be quite blunt, the bulk of it was
because we had excessive overheads for what we needed to do.
Um, and that those two things plus a whole bunch
of improved procurement.
I mean we have the transformation touches all
improvement levers across it.
So that has got the operating earnings up.
And then the other thing that's doing it is we're getting
our CapEx cost down, which is kind of
what you need to do to do the build.
So our build costs are reducing
and there's also quite a lot
of CapEx in the maintenance costs
and when you put the two together, that's
what results debt being that much lower.
So, and,
and like we said, like we've really,
particularly on maintenance, really watch closely.
'cause you can always hit maintenance targets
by just not maintaining.
But we are very much monitoring a number of metrics
that tell us us, we think we're doing the right maintenance,
and as we said, the tenant satisfaction's gone up, not down.
Now we need to keep watching it
because what we don't want is to just defer maintenance,
but we're pretty confident at this point
that we're doing the right maintenance
Efficiently. It's
a little bit of a nuance to the maintenance thing too,
but just the link,
because we are now focused on renewal activity,
and we have a pipeline of around 2000 homes a year
that are going to come out of our system
because they're old, they're unsuitable,
they're in poor locations.
We know that pipeline
and we can, we can just do hold maintenance on that
so you don't end up overinvesting in a home
that's gonna be demolished or removed from stock.
That's quite an important piece of the, of the asset puzzle.
And, um, and validates
and parti sort of another really, I think, valuable thing
for the committee to know is that, um, one
of the very powerful insights on build cost is
that we, when we were,
because there was a reluctance to sell sites,
meaning you were always ready redeveloping on your own,
irregular, poorly located
sloping sites at an enormous amount of cost to the build.
So by trading those away
and focusing on flat rectangular sites
in the right location,
the build cost per unit is materially large.
And, and it enables you to build a very square, clean
form for the building.
They look a bit boxy, we get that,
but they're extremely efficient
and very livable and very livable.
They're much better formatted and costly.
So those are really important parameters to understand.
So nowadays, the team that develop a plate,
a a standard library of design, so we,
we don't redesign on every site.
We essentially, we're designing for every format of site.
Now we don't that we, we find a site that is suitable
for our standard design.
We now, we own a lot of those sites.
We have lots of good rectangular flat sites.
We just use those and we'll exit the irregular ones.
I should, I should take the opportunity to ask you this,
uh, comment the ministers made
before, which is making sure the houses are
built for the right, right.
Target market. Yes.
For example, the, you know, large number
of single occupancy homes.
Is that, is that a piece of work?
We, we, we work,
we work extremely well with HUD, by the way.
So, you know, it's a great working relationship.
And so they, you know, we have a good
robust sort of dialogue with them.
They listen carefully to our knowledge.
So you would want hud I think, to know,
understand completely on the ground experience
and knowledge of paying or as people.
So we have a great relationship there.
We raise the issue, it us who draw attention to the
mismatch in the stock relative
to who's coming off the register.
Mm-hmm. That said,
and I I you'll all understand this, it, it feels, you know,
building a $700,000 unit for every single person, it's,
it feels like a very expensive solution.
So, so they're not one, bedrooms are important part
of the stock, but you don't wanna be overweight them.
They're less flexible.
We, they, you know, I've heard a couple
of our CHP partners say, Hmm,
one bedroom things are not good
because we're of entrenching loneliness, right.
From the get. So we, we, you know, we are working to
increase the supply,
but we certainly not going to go up to building 50%
of all our new builds at one beds.
Yeah. Two beds are a better format.
They have more flexibility
and they enable us to, to do more with them.
But, but it's a work in progress fi finding the, and
Look, it gets less, um, air time,
but we're also building more four
and five bedroom houses as well.
So there was a shortage at both ends of that
Spectrum. Uh,
and I, I personally think
that we need a lot more system thinking around
what are the drivers of single people on the wait list
and then what are the solutions to
that than we currently have.
'cause the answer can't be building a
one bedroom place for everyone. So, yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Uh, something
Cool. Um,
guys, um, thanks for all your work, um,
that you've been doing over the last year.
Um, just on the kind of order reset.
So a big part of that was, um, the reduction of 798
FTEs over, uh, between the period of June 24th and Yep.
June 25. Are you planning for further
reductions in FTEs?
This is something that's kind
of floating around at the moment.
Do you wanna speak? I I'll speak to that.
So, um, so, uh, while we, it's
what we went through, um, in the last
18 months was a real reset where we needed to correct
what was a particularly high overhead, um, right.
So I don't think you should expect
to see something like that again.
But we are absolutely looking at our operating model
and our operating processes
and looking for how we can remove waste
and get more efficient.
And those may have implications for, um, for future roles.
And we've been very transparent
with our people that that could happen.
But this is now a more sophisticated
end-to-end process design
and in due course application of technology to enable that.
But yes, there could be more.
Okay. That's helpful. Thank you for that.
Oh, can I ask Oh yeah,
But quite a few wedding we'll try and get, yeah,
Yeah. I'll circle back.
I'll circle back. Just a short
supplementary on all of this.
Um, uh, the, with the amazing performance
and all the amazing savings, is it sustainable?
Can you carry on with the same model that you've been using?
Yes, a hundred percent. Yeah.
So we, we, we not only believe it's sustainable that
where we're at, but we believe there's substantial
additional optimization opportunity, um, particularly
with the, um, application of enhanced technology,
but only as one of the, the key enablers,
not the magic bullet that's gonna solve everything.
Um, but we've achieved a lot of improvement very quickly,
and maintenance is a perfect example.
And our GM of national services, Nick Mailing is here.
Um, so, um, Nick's continuing to push for refinements
around our maintenance delivery system
to be more streamlined with better information.
So we think not only can we hold this,
but we can improve on it.
And the other thing that I'd really stress is
that we've put a, a, a big part of our strategy is to,
to build a lower cost, more reliable, repeatable,
but also more easily scalable so that the government
of the day can choose to dial us up or down, uh,
and can do that without cost
blowing out as much as they did.
There's without a doubt, obviously capital
cost for build and go up.
There's some operating cost roles that will have
to come up if you, if we deliver more.
But nowhere near as much as what was there.
I think you just, um, if you think of, you know,
having done a lot of these business efficiency programs in
the past, transformations, Matt's Matt's a global expert.
This, you do have to think of it a little bit in sort
of peeling the first heavy layers off the onion.
And what you find once you, once you remove the first layers
of inefficiency, you find a whole lot of new opportunities
because they, they mask the, the more so it tends, it'll,
it'll roll over time.
Technology will be an enormous part of that.
K stack was probably the worst I've ever seen.
So, uh, you know, haggled pig, the, what's
the it stack, the stack,
the worst it stack I've seen in the business that I've been,
you know, haggy pig, multi-generational,
tied together with string
Model, Lots of, lots
and lots of humans trying to manage in
between all the component parts, the, the, it's,
it will be in a very, very large, um,
positive impact when we get that, um, when we get that text
and modernize over the next three to four years. Yeah.
Just, just to substantiate that.
So, um, I got a briefing from, I can't remember, one
of our partners, uh, not long after coming in
and they said, oh, you do realize you've got 18 instances
of Oracle, which is the worst of any public
or private sector organization in Australia, New Zealand.
So, so we have a bit of a mess to address there.
And it really is holding back our people from doing, um,
their best work for our tenants every day.
Um, at the moment, for example, they don't trust our data,
and so they spend a lot of time checking and rechecking.
'cause obviously what we act on
with our data has a real implication
for people in the real world.
Um, if they go out to a tenant
and they've taken paper copies of something for them to sign
and they took the wrong thing, they have
to go all the way back to the office and print it again
and go all the way back and it should just be on a tablet.
So, so there are big opportunities there,
and it's not just cost efficiencies.
It will allow our tenant managers
to do more valuing time with tenants.
And part of our ultimate vision is that, we'll, also, again,
working closely with other agencies
that are also upgrading tech like MSD allow our tenants
to more easily interact with government
and get what they've done.
'cause a lot of our tenant managers spend a lot of time
with our tenants helping them navigate paperwork
in government land.
So, so it's gonna take time,
like it's not gonna be 18 months,
it's gonna be more like sort of four
to five years this next phase to really unlock that.
But we think there's an enormous opportunity. So
He, um, I wanna ask about safety.
Mm-hmm. Um, because, um, you talked about 87%
of people coming through saying it was safe.
But I have, um, a constituency
and I see some pretty concerning, um, issues
around safety, particularly women, vulnerable women,
but there are lots of KO tenants are vulnerable.
So what I wanna know is that 13%, do we know
who they are, who don't feel safe?
And then, um, what kinds of
processes are being put in place to recognize
that the people in KO are often vulnerable and fearful?
So for example, I'll give you an example.
One issue that I've had is
that when somebody makes a complaint, it's not anonymous.
Once they get to a certain point, the other tenant might
appeal and then everything's on the record.
And in fact, that then the complaint goes away.
There is often fear from one tenant
about retaliation.
What are we doing in those spaces?
And how much do you know about that? 13%? Yeah.
So, so look, to be really clear, we,
we share your concerns
and it's, uh, concerns for our tenants.
It's con concerns for, um, the neighbors of our tenants,
be they tenants or other members of the committee.
And it's concerns for our people too as well.
Um, so, uh, we sh we, we share the concern.
Um, it's important to stress that, um,
we don't have any magic rights
that other landlords don't have.
So we have to operate via the residential tenants, you know,
the RTA, um, to be able to, to address these.
Um, but our tenant managers are, are,
are always onto the case to try
and understand what's going on.
In some cases will move people, either the person
who may have been disruptive
or at least it's a poor neighbor situation,
or sometimes it's the person who's been affected.
Uh, and, um, and sometimes,
and I think one of our big pushes over the last 18 months is
to put much firmer boundaries around, uh,
what's acceptable behavior, um, and what's not.
And when there is unacceptable behavior to actually follow
through with section 55 8 warnings
and ultimately as required to terminate.
Now we do everything we can to try and avoid that
and get help for the people who are both affected,
but also the people doing the disruptive behavior.
But sometimes we have to follow through on that.
Um, but it's not perfect
and we still have a lot of work to do there.
But, um, you know, I get every, um,
every enforcement to terminate.
I personally approve and review the, the case,
and there hasn't been a single one that's come to me
where our people hadn't done everything humanly possible
to try and both help the person who's being disruptive,
change their behavior and get help,
but also, uh, obviously help the people
around them being affected.
Um, and I, I look, but we, we have more work to do
and we are concerned for the safety
of our tenants and our, our people.
Thank you. Um,
there's quite a lot to that.
I'm keen to dive into there,
but I'm conscious I need to focus on one thing.
I'm the same boat. Um, uh,
We're glad, We're
Interesting. Yeah.
Well, there's a lot I'm interested in anyway.
No, uh, so look, I let, let's talk about your comment
around dial up dog.
So, um, it's no secret to anyone that when, uh,
KAA was established,
housing New Zealand didn't have a build capacity
and you had to start from scratch.
The fear is that if a future government, regardless of whom
that is, wants to expand the number of KAA homes,
that you won't have the capacity to do it.
So I'm assuming that when you say dial up,
you're assuring us that you do have that capacity.
Uh, what I would answer, um, the member's question is
to say, uh, yes we do,
but we can't do it on a 20,
turn it on a 20 cent piece, right?
So, um, with some lead time, we can ramp it up.
And the, the features
that we believe make this much more scalable than the
situation that was there at the start
of triangle order's existence is we now have the housing
delivery system, which is a very lean operations, you know,
designed where you can add augment of capacity of people
who operate that system to whatever level that's required.
We also have a more sophisticated supply chain
and build partner, um, um, management approach,
um, and um, can scale that up more quickly.
But we, in our build partners cannot go from a standing
start to delivering thousands more homes
in anything under 18 to 24 to planning,
consent, consenting, you know, so these are
For sure, But consenting for example,
we can scale consenting if we need.
Yeah.
In terms of your capacity, your best estimate is
that were 18 months notice, you could start expanding
The number of That would be the minimum.
Yeah, we would really need at least a couple of years.
And ideally what we're looking to do is trying
to get onto more of a three to four year horizon.
But yeah, I think that would be a realistic timeframe.
And this will be of interest to a lot of people.
Frontline providers across the country are, um, indicating
an increase in homelessness.
Some are saying that that increase is unprecedented.
Um, and you are doing what you've been asked
of the government and not expanding your numbers.
A question I get regularly is, this doesn't add up.
Why is that? And in fairness, I say to them, well,
you're doing what you've been told,
but if you were told by government moving forward
that we do want you to start expanding your numbers to meet
that need, you could do it
with an appropriate lead in time. Yeah,
I think that's just to be, there's two,
there's two things to think about there.
Um, the first is, yes, we can ramp up,
but ramping up to be, to do
that on an efficient basis means lead time for dealing with,
you know, where to build the plans.
Acquiring, so what, what are, you know, gearing up,
we can ease easy enough gear up the internal team,
the added support in the,
in the housing delivery system to do that.
It's just really the underst more the marketing of it.
That's the driver. The second is to think, to be very clear,
if there's a ramp up to solve a problem around homelessness,
for example, what's the specific cohort?
For example, rough sleepers need a completely different
solution than, uh,
than large families who are living in a car.
There's, uh, so we, you would, you would need
to be clearly understand what is the role we are playing.
And for example, rough, rough sleepers are better
with supported housing.
You know, they, they're a different model that
I wasn't suggesting that you step in
and fix homelessness, I'm just saying is a mismatch in
people's minds between a growing level
of rough sleeping and homelessness.
And kor korra are not
Expanding it. We, we understand that,
But the, the, the, I'm interested
to understand this a bit more.
So you, you have a, uh,
you're not gonna expand your numbers,
but you have a program where you are reprioritizing,
you're selling to build, you're using the land
that you currently have, et cetera.
I assume that as part of your planning,
you are identifying over the next few years
what sites you might look to redevelop so
that you can then build new ones.
Uh, do you have the capacity to bring
that work forward in the first instance while you start to
talk about lead in time?
I get you're not expanding your numbers,
but you must have some idea of what you can do in the short
Term. One thing that
gives me a lot of confidence about that, um,
is, uh, my board
and I, the management team, we do a lot of regional visits.
We do these between, so we go for a day
and sort of, it's all meet all the, one of the things you,
you realize is that every, every city in
and town in New Zealand has suburbs that were built
with social housing have quite densely populated suburbs
with old format duplexes and large section.
We have a lot of capacity in those areas
that we, that we own.
So they look a bit like smaller versions
of the large scale projects in Auckland
where we have these dense.
So, so I don't, I don't see a problem in scaling in terms
of us having location in the larger towns.
Diff different if you're in a small location
where there's not much, that would take a bit longer, but
Well in places like central
Wellington are more challenging,
CBDs very Different land available, et cetera.
But yeah. Um,
but I mean, look on the, on the land one,
I know there's been a lot of interest
and maybe to preempt the question, so we are exiting, um,
or selling about 20% of our land holdings,
but we've ensured we've kept, um, enough land to be able
to meet our medium and longer term needs,
including keeping flexibility
for, for what you're talking about.
But it doesn't help anyone for us to sit on too much.
And so that, that was our judgment of the appropriate amount
to to, to redeploy.
'cause o otherwise it sits there
as land banking effectively.
I'm, I'm gonna have to draw this, uh,
to conclusion pretty short,
but I'm gonna, I'm gonna sneak in one more
and then we've got a questions.
Uh, um, but I just thought I I,
I've been holding off this question,
but given Kieran went for, uh, went for it, I'll, I'll just,
um, I'm interested in the repeatable,
scalable comment you made earlier
and how this maps into what some
of the questions Kieran was asking
and what work you're doing with, um, offsite manufacturers
to deliver repeatable, scalable designs.
'cause I mean, I've visited so, so one here in Wellington,
another one down in Central Otago that do this work.
And, and some of 'em, they can actually, they can add on up
to six stories, for example, over time.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, they can expand. Yeah.
This mod modular building. Yes.
Um, they can actually forward build as well.
So I'm interested in what commissioning work has being done.
We've, we've, around that space,
We've, um, we've been down every path conceivable on
offsite manufacturing.
We've tested every model.
Um, and, uh,
and what we do today is we work with large scale builders
who, who who know how
to source the right componentry in offsite manufacturing.
And we, we leave those decisions to them.
Those large scale firms who know how to build lots
of houses, they, they do that behind them.
We, the most of the things we tried did not succeed.
Um, and we never found the model that worked better.
And, um, and in low rise sort of, you know, three
and four level apartment, we have a formalized set
of designs now, which are, uh, extremely repeatable,
which we've spent a lot of time with, uh, the constructors
to make sure they're highly buildable
and they, they will use lots of offsite elements
to put those up quickly.
So source that from external.
Yeah. Yeah. I think, I mean,
I think we, like the New Zealand
Market, will widely have struggled
to make offsite managing work at scale.
Yeah. Right. Laura supplementary.
So my supplementary probably goes right back to how, um,
and it's more to do with, um, around those like the tenants
and the unruly ones
and the disruptive ones to, um, other people
that are obviously living in close quarters.
'cause I do get, we do get those concerns sometimes.
Um, have the changes
to the Residential Tenancies Act enabled you to do more
with, um, those particular tenants?
Uh, yes. I believe those have been helpful.
But I might get, um, Nick mailing our team
of national services to maybe comment on that. Mm-hmm.
So we'll come, We'll come, come forward camera
In short. Yes.
So the night to day notices, um,
are useful in some circumstances?
Uh, absolutely.
Okay. Yeah, the bar is still quite high.
I was gonna say, do you know how, like
how frequently you use those
For disruptive behavior?
Not that frequently. We tend to reach for other tools.
So our first objectives to try and change behavior. Mm-hmm.
So we, we will use notices under the RTA that warn people.
Mm-hmm. Give them three warnings and then
before the Tenancy Tribunal, um, we'll,
we'll then use other avenues under the 10,
the Residential Tenancies Act that allow you to
create a situation where natural justice can play out.
So the tenant gets to have a say in the process
and, and so on.
Um, and so we tend to reach for those tools first,
but in some situations we will use night diagnosis.
I think we've made, maybe used 'em in about four, I'd have
to check this figure, but four or five instances.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah.
And do you take into account the other people
that are say, like living in a block?
A hundred percent. Their concerns, like are more paramount,
especially with safety and things like that complete.
I have heard some pretty outrageous stuff sometimes,
Uh, just to help avoid nickel comment more on that.
But just from a board setting, we had an explicit
that actually we have an obligation to the
other tenants and the neighbors.
So we can't, it's, you have to, what's, what's the,
what's the worst of two bad outcomes?
Do we, do we, do we, are we harsh on one disruptive tenant
or do we leave 10 other tenants living in fear or Yeah.
Having, and, and so our biases toward the benefit
for the community and if the one can't make it work,
then unfortunately we have to end up making a change
because we've got 10 other families who are being stressed
and, uh, by that.
And that's, so we act with that.
That's very much the bias of you.
Um, the most successful thing I think we use tool is,
is relocation, isn't it?
We, when we relocate people by
and large, we get a pretty good,
You can get 'em to reset.
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah.
Because often you end up with situations
of being with conflict.
Yeah, of course. So as soon as you take someone out of
that situation, put 'em somewhere else,
it's fine. A different situation.
So we forget often that it's, it's always the kind
or a tenant to gets the complaint that, you know,
we all have, we all have neighbors in the private
world who, you know.
Yeah. Not necessarily. So there's always more than one party
involved in these issues. So
Last supple line of questioning,
Whatever this line of questioning,
There's a, yeah,
I feel like I can just bring up whatever,
but just to put it out there, the things I'm
to ask you about in this session,
hopefully we've got like hour left, is, um,
building efficiency and what things you've
learned and what you can do better.
Occupancy rates, you talked about that before.
And one of the many answers,
I'm really keen to dig into that.
Um, local procurement of local, um, subcontractors
and, um, people that are building the housing.
Um, I wanna understand the minister talked about, um,
local government consents not really being ideal.
So I wanna understand what kind of,
where the problem areas in the country are
and what the problem is.
And, um, single site supported housing.
So you just mentioned that before.
I'll just say I'm gonna,
I'm gonna do single site supported housing.
I, I do. And then I'll just wait
List for primary questions.
What's that? I do have,
Have you on my list for Cool. Waiting for primary
Questions. Okay, cool. So I'll
just ask about single site supported
Housing. We'd welcome a visit.
Yeah.
By the way, if you'd like to come
and, you know, we'd heavily
Yeah, yeah, I'd love that outside
Of the process, so, yeah.
Yeah, that'd be great. Um,
so I'll ask about single site supported housing.
'cause I wasn't sure whether it fit better with you guys
or with, um, and uh, 'cause it's just a bit confusing
because we've got some in Wellington,
but it sits within a kind water site,
but it's managed by mm-hmm.
City Mission. So is that, are
you guys the right ones to ask about that?
Yep. Yes. You, yes We are. Cool.
Um, so obviously that type of housing is super important
and that's the kind of housing that's gonna help
to house tenants with the most complex needs,
but you guys don't have funding
beyond this year, is my understanding.
So what's the kind of plan B?
'cause I kind of wanna bring a case example
of 11 Church Street in Wellington Central.
Um, probably the, one of the more problematic, um,
kind order facilities which have had massive problems
with tenants, um,
because there isn't that wraparound care and support.
So what's the plan going forward for, um,
single site supported housing and what's the future for TE
or in Wellington and uh, Tewa in Auckland?
Okay. So there's a lot to unpack there.
Um, so, uh, so yes, we, uh, have been running
what are have been positioned as
and uh, two pilots basically.
So there was the Tomato I one, which is a model that was
of higher scale that we manage end to end in Auckland, um,
and Teora, which is of a smaller scale,
which is done in partnership
with the Wellington City Mission.
Uh, and then Church Street, which is more, um,
a high scale kind of high density
but doesn't have the supported housing, uh, wrap around it.
Um, so what I can tell you is that we've been having a lot
of discussions with Wellington City Mission
and with Hub to think through
what are the learnings from the pilots
and what are the options for
where we take single site supported housing from here.
'cause as you correctly said, the current funding expires
for both tomato y
and Toor, uh, at the end of this financial year.
Um, so we're in advance discussions. Yeah.
We haven't had, um, firm outcomes, uh, on those yet.
And you may want to ask hu later around
what their intentions are around, around that.
But we're well engaged with HUD
and with Wellington City Mission, et cetera.
You know, and as part of that, we've been looking at Church
Street and what we do with it
and the other moving parts in in Wellington, um, as well.
So there's quite a bit to, to nut through there.
And I think, again,
this is probably more appropriate question for hud,
but HUD is also looking at,
'cause we've got single, well they've,
us the system has single site supported housing.
There's transitional housing, there's housing first.
And I think there's quite a lot of thinking into
what are the right fit for the right cohorts
and what's the right funding model.
But once you get beyond that,
those single site supported housing
and those sort of policy questions, you're probably best
to ask the HUD team later.
So we do need to resolve what's happening with Thor
and Tam Tomato and we're well advance,
but don't have firm outcomes on that yet.
Mm-hmm. Alright. Um, new Christian follow
Up.
Um, my question has to do with, uh,
what the minister was talking about, where
there would be wraparound, um, services for,
for the tenants and that that would make for a more, um,
uh, uh, more, uh, uh, cohesive community,
uh, KO community.
Um, what have you done in terms of, uh, tenancy management,
um, particularly, uh, for example with stresses from
tenants not being able to pay, um, their, their costs, um,
and, and increasing debt in that space?
Yeah, so, um, so we work with a lot of, uh,
government agencies
and other, uh, not-for-profit providers, uh, iwi, chips,
et cetera, um, to, uh, try
and broker the right support for our tenants.
Like we, we aren't set up to
or funded to provide all of that support ourselves,
but we do sometimes end up acting like a bit
of an account manager, connect the right people, um, uh,
with the right agencies, um, so that, you know,
the very active that goes on there.
And then, um, again, maybe you could be come back when,
when, when HUD comes in as well.
But that's where, um, things like transitional housing
and housing first sometimes use our houses.
But there's a third party provider
who actually does the wraparound support
and is directly contracted by, uh, through those programs
by, by hu effectively to, to do that.
So I think there's a few different
options that are going on there.
And then of course we just touched on the single site
supported housing one as well.
Um, so there's quite a lot I think, to noodle through
and is in the process of being worked through in the system
around what, what are the right fit for the right cohorts,
um, to be able to provide that support.
But what, you know, I think during the first four years
of Kanga war in places we sort of stepped in to fill gaps
and took on board things that
maybe we weren't really set up or funded to do.
So we're trying to get that right balance of not
just solving the problem ourselves,
but really working with other agencies
to try and broker the right help. But
I think we'll be in a position to give you a lot more
and clearer answer to the role we play
next year when we are here.
Tracy has kicked off the work around the operating model
work for better understanding the, the cohorts
of tenants we've got and sort of,
and you know, we, we don't,
we have in the past have had a relatively sort
of weak segmentation view, sort of high needs, lower needs,
not very well put into practice.
And it's much more, it's much more nuanced than that.
So she
and the team are going the lead next to,
to better understand
and then we can determine more what is the sort of,
how do we, how do we apply the more resources
to the more need and less for those
who are very self-sufficient.
You, you also asked about rent debt.
One, one of the first things my new board,
and I I was onto this very quickly, was a realization
that we had thousands of tenants
with very large amounts of debt, which had mostly come
through the tough times of COVID and the follow on.
They lost their jobs, they couldn't pay.
And so there was circumstances which had led to
that in combination with the sustaining tenancy's view that,
that it was just unreasonable to leave them with
that impossible street.
If you, if you are in those situations to have a $10,000
debt with us, it un unsolvable
for those families would be with them for their lives.
So, so what we created was an incentive program where
if they worked with us
and agreed to make the payments that we,
they reasonably could, that we would waive right back
to a 12 weeks de position that has been
remarkably successful.
So in effect, I think we waived around seven seven,
but the customer said paid back nine in the time.
So and we now, sorry. Sorry. Or
Seven. They paid seven,
sorry. We forgave 7 million
In return for in that year or so in order
To qualify for the, yeah.
To qualify for
The, for the, the sort of forgiveness of debt they had
to lift their, their debt repayment to a kind
of sustainable level for them and for us.
And that has meant that we've paid, they have paid off
a lot more debt than we've alongside of
Yeah. Nightmare.
We've Forgiven and 3000 tenants have come outta
debt with us in one year. So
It's changed the entire outlook for some household.
Yeah. It's closer to 5,000 from the peak.
And I, I actually think that's the biggest success story
'cause we were not doing our yeah.
Tenants any favors. Um, yeah. Running up big debt.
So I think that's back under control
and now the key is really helping them stay there.
Yeah. Um, and sometimes that involves, uh,
really working hard with them, with MSD and others to try
and provide support to avoid going over the 12 weeks.
'cause we're pretty clear now.
It can't go over 12 weeks or we have to act.
Um, but yeah, we've got,
there's almost 5,000 less tenants who've got
that worry in the back of their mind. So Yeah.
And just look, one final thing,
and again, this is something we are just beginning
to surface and work on
and the board is across this is that it is,
we are moving from the won't pay to the can't pay.
Um, and so we are now work,
we've got the team working on
what are the potential solutions.
If for example, you get on a benefit, stand down,
then you can't pay, you know?
Yeah. Because at the moment that can lead
to us terminating a tendency.
They go straight out of the system probably.
So we, we are trying to figure out how do we manage some
of these more more difficult circumstances.
And so yeah. So tenants who engage with us,
generally we can find a solution
when we terminate for non-payment.
It's essentially they're just refusing
to engage. New, new
Question al time was it now?
So, um, um, chips,
that's chips are you saying community housing?
We work with them. Partner, yeah.
Yeah. Is that a, um, I, I, um, how does that work?
Um, how, I guess,
'cause I'm, I'm trying to figure it out in terms of, um,
Maori, uh, providers that are in that business
and the way that it connects to what your,
your plan or your program is.
My, my, the, my board
and I, we are, we are very big fans of the CHPs.
Yeah. We, we think, you know, we've met many of them.
I think they do amazing work.
The the main challenge is access to, to funding and finance.
So, but if, if that can be solved with some
of the initiatives, um, the government are working
with them on and hard, then that's a great thing.
And, and I'd say generally our observation would be
that they deal with that they're more tailored
and attuned to a particular cohort.
It might be a Maori heising provider
or have a mental health specialty
or a facility for older folks or more disabled.
They can do a much better job than we can.
We, we, we sort of do the mass market if you like,
and they, they do these more specialized, like, you know,
the more we can, we can support that, the better.
And we are, we are very comfortable
with the government's current settings that let us get
our machine going on renewal work.
'cause we have a lot of very old and poor quality houses
and we'd like to deal with those.
And we are happy with the new money being focused on the
CHPs because we think there's a great deal
of merit powering up that system
and that they, they can do a better job in many
cases than we can. So, thank you.
Just, um, one thing I'd add to that is that, um,
quite a few instances of our land sales
or divestments are going to chips or Maori entities.
Yeah. Um, so it's great to see when it happens that it,
it stays in the social, uh, housing system.
Not always, but there's, there's at least I think five
or six examples in the last six months. So,
And, and we also lease a lot of properties
through our support housing portfolio to
social services providers and ships and others.
Yes. So I just, um,
and now I'm the minister talked about land supply.
There was one of his key points when he opened up.
And do you know what he meant?
What he means is if he can make land more available Yes.
It, it effectively makes it a less
competitively priced products.
If you can, if you can increase supply land will be lower
cost, which means developers can develop it Right.
At a lower cost to the end outcomes.
And that's generally right.
If you increase supply, you can,
you can make it more favorable for development.
And in our cases, in our, in our areas,
it's the inefficient use of land in the old Yeah.
The old social housing heavy suburbs with very old
and poor quality homes on them.
So we, we look to free that up
and we release some of it for private development and
because we can densify our own development in those areas.
So we would typically take two
or three a adjoined sites Yeah.
'cause he and, And build a, a dense
Facility. Yeah. He talked about the
far north
quite a bit in his conversation.
And my connect to that is, um, is,
is uh, an iwi uh, um, group, um,
connected with the builders down the road as opposed
to build smart and Hamilton.
And then, um, um, contracting them
to build 16 homes, which is what we did.
And, um, one bedroom, two bedroom and so on.
And just relating to some of the typology
that you were referring to
and what showed up in the homes that we ended up building,
which is probably about 140 people housed individuals Yeah.
In those homes. And, but we had our own land. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
So we, and we'd already had the,
our infrastructure in place.
So it just, the, I just, I guess
what I'm saying is there are opportunities literally there
if you know who to connect
and talk to that are, I think just waiting
for the opportunity for the, these kinds of relationships
We have. We have an open door to
all the,
all the CHPs, the iwi groups.
And so it's a, and very, very positive about working with,
with the ones who are organized and do a good job.
We've got a whole bunch of land. Yep. Whole bunch. Thank
You. Um,
just on the, the, um, answers
and questions around the land supply, keen to Yeah.
Understand, where are you struggling the most
to get consents for public housing?
And what do you think the reasons are?
Oh, um, uh, I think there's, you know,
there's problems in a, in a number of places and,
and you know, we're working closely with council
'cause we need to make sure we're doing, you know, our side
of the equation as well as we can.
But yeah, we, we have experienced delays in quite a few
different, um, councils.
I don't have to hand exactly where those are, um, exactly
what all the drivers of those, uh,
are is a little less clear to us.
But as I said, we're working with councils on it.
But we have noticed that as a bit of a, a trend, um, that,
and that it is a concern for us that's, uh,
putting at risk some of our build targets just
To Clarify that
It's not building consents.
We do that ourselves. A resource. It's resource. Yeah.
Which is the slower part because that's the planning
and approval and infrastructure and traffic.
So, so our, our Carolyn McDowell,
who leads our development team has been reporting
through her monthly reports for the last few months.
That slower council turnarounds generally. Yes.
So that's, she's, it's not a kind of,
it's a general specific issue.
Council turnarounds on contending, uh, slowing the system
and putting delivery at risk.
And that could be as simple as they've got more time
because there's less work going on in the construction
center, see, um, uh, in the construction industry
and they're asking more questions
and taking longer to review things.
It can be, it could be as simple as that,
but we don't really have clarity on that.
But, um, the minister has asked us for more clarity,
so we'll be providing it.
But it has turned up
and we, he has noticed it in our reports to him.
We've been calling out consenting delays because
It, so it's the, it's the backend
that count the council processing it as opposed
to like NIMBY residents
who don't want public housing in the backyard. No,
I, I, it's not, not to my understanding.
The community stance shift.
We, we have, uh, we have I think as low
as 1% of our developments
where there's any meaningful community opposition.
I think it's eight. I think we've got eight
developers nationwide.
We just give all the petitions here. So no,
communities are generally pretty happy with, you know, and,
and where we work, it's, you know, we do a good job there.
And so it's, we don't read, that's not as big a thing.
You read about it because it's an interesting news story,
but it's actually a very small,
a very small proportion of the time.
Are we having any real community
pushback to our developments?
Mostly they're welcomed
because they're, they're upgrading the area. Your
Question, Helen. Yes, thank
you. Um, I wanna talk about the issue of you
as a systems lead and the kind of predictive ability
and capacity that you're building up in terms of
where the housing needs to be.
So, uh, um, the MP for Mount Albert, it's an area
where we're gonna have a lot of intensification
and where a lot of people are trying to encourage,
encourage that kind of growth.
But alongside it, we've got Wesley suddenly stopped.
Um, and yet there must be a predictable need
for KAA Ora in the area.
Can you tell me of, the other example I can give you is age.
We've got an aging population, you've got a whole lot
of people who are renting that,
that weren't renting in the last generation.
So what are you doing in terms of leading in that work
and understanding of,
and I know it's really hard by the way, but what do you do?
What challenges do you face?
Do you think you're doing enough of that prediction of
where we need this housing and what type of housing we need?
I, I'll get Matt to give you a, a, a more in depth answer,
but just to be clear, we do still maintain, uh,
an urban development role in
and around our areas where we've got
concentrated social housing portfolio.
So that's still with us and we regard that as core business.
So in an era like Wesley where we have a high concentration,
we would still see ourselves
as an urban development lead there.
And we have a lot of expertise in working with council
and others who have to come to the party on infrastructure
or working with government and,
and hud, so HUD lead,
lead the work on the long-term demographics
and demand profile.
That's their, their,
So I can ask them about that.
Yeah. They, they, we makes their role. We
Look at the needs and do some work around how the, the,
um, social housing basis changing in their needs, et cetera.
And we feed all of that through to MSD and to, and to hud.
But I think the core of your questions are HUD question.
Yeah. Because they're the ones looking at where do we need
to build, how much social,
how much affordable, how much this and that.
And, um, so I know they're on
after us, so maybe you could come back
And then Yeah. Question more.
Oh, right. Um, yeah.
Um, thank you for your work.
I mean, it's impressive, the information that you've shared
with us today, truly outstanding.
Um, I'd just like to ask a question
around the large scale projects
that are developed in partnership with councils
and iwi in the, um, with the benefit of hindsight,
and I'm not sure how old a lot of them are,
but, um, do you see any social issues
with condensed developments like that evolving?
Or do you keep an eye on that in any way? Could
Speak to North Coast do that?
I just, um, I, I think again, one of the early pieces
of work for the board was what to try to get a view of
what is the ideal social housing development?
What, what does what is an ideal development?
And I'm not talking about CBDs,
if we're talking about sort of call it suburban.
And the, and the focus for us is where we have the very,
very effective, um, mini communities is the sort
of 20 to 50 units in a, in a,
in a group, in a small apartment building, some villas,
some standalone houses, some terrace Right.
Mixture of formats that works incredibly well.
So that's our preferred model.
So what we tend to do in a, in a large area, like a Wesley
or Roskill or is to build those clusters.
And then there will be every other form of market housing,
and then there'll be another one over here.
And that, that's the pro, that's the favored model.
So we, we tending to work toward that outcome.
And those, they are nicely done.
They have a lot of shared immunity,
they have a little playground, they have bike sheds,
you know, they, so that works well
and the tenants care about them
and they look out for each other.
And usually a natural leader turns up.
And so they, that's our,
that's the way we're directing most development.
Probably the, the example
that might be most directly relevant
to your question is North Coat.
Um, where, um, you know, really there was a bunch
of old housing on big sections that look like semi-rural,
like 15 minutes from the bridge, right?
So, um, it was kind of crazy.
And when you go there now, um, that is a lot higher density
and it's a mix of social and um,
and uh, and private housing.
And I will say there was a lot
of community concern at the start that's dissipated a lot.
Uh, and a lot of that is actually, um,
brokering community actions
and helping people interact in a way where they actually get
to meet the neighbors, et cetera.
Um, so I do think it's manageable,
but it needs to be done thoughtfully
and you've gotta be very, um,
clear about the right topologies
and the right mix of social and non-social.
But, um, that's worked quite well at Northco and, and,
and the, the trend is in the right direction
for the community, getting the wider community,
being more comfortable with where it's at.
Um, quick suck on that one.
Um, is, so is there any vetting of the tenants? Yes.
You know, to make sure there's a good mix
In a, in a, in a larger higher density,
large, very careful placement. Placement
Is one of the most important decisions we can make Yeah.
For the customer themselves in terms of their, the success
and the tenancy, but also
for the community that they live in.
So we're where we've got density, um,
as a challenge then we will be very thoughtful about how,
who and how we place there.
We just have to do so in a way that respects
the stratification on the waiting list in terms
of housing those in greatest need.
So, um, you know, there are some limits to, to how flexible
that system is, but within those limits we absolutely look,
look for the best possible solution
based on what we know at the time.
That's good to know. Any question,
David? The only other point
I'd make is like density is a,
is a housing market trend.
It's not a social housing trend.
So we're constantly trying to lean against a,
a broader trend to achieve the best social outcomes
with the cohorts that we house.
Yeah. And, and I guess the risk that, you know, I was sort
of leaning towards was, you know, those old tenement
buildings in Britain where they just become liquid,
Don't favor that.
We don't favor those.
They is they in in CBD areas
and you don't really have any other choice
because it's not available land.
But, but in suburban we just don't favor that format.
So if you go
and visit some of our more,
you'll be blown away how good they are.
And, and they're an interesting mix of formats
and, you know, typologies and,
and you know, when you have a great housing support
management team there,
that is emphasize choosing the right people
who are gonna succeed in that mini community.
That's, that's half of the battle went on day one. That's
To win. Yeah.
Yeah. I might just very briefly,
I guess I went slash question,
Um, I, I visited Glen Nun, uh, not that long.
I, I, I, you know, went, used to, used to go walk
through there, go to a train over a decade ago.
Mm-hmm. But the, the difference is amazing.
And now I know there's a lot of
community concern at the beginning.
Yeah. Uh, but the intensification work
and the quality of the communities
that have been built there is is quite impressive.
Yeah. I know it's not directly your project,
but you're obviously, um, related to it is, is is
that the type, type of community that you're aiming
to build, um, to Yeah. Yeah.
And we still work closely with EE region.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. They're driving that.
Thanks. New question team.
Um, I've just got a couple local questions,
but I guess it maybe, um, yeah.
Touches on uh, kind orders financial decision making.
So Dickon Street Flats, um,
you guys sold it.
Um, and then weeks later it was sold again on the market
for like three times the value.
So that's a pretty poor financial decision from you guys
'cause you lost out on all of that money.
So what's like the reflections from that decision
Making? I think just, just
from the outset, you know, that we saw
that building for $1 million, so understand what that means.
Right. It was, it was
a super high risk development project.
It was not,
it was massively earthquake strengthening requirements.
So we just could not get our head around the risk.
So be frank, if we had, we thought we might have
to pay someone to take the building off our hands.
So that was, we, we were comfortable to exit it.
Yes. The folks who bought it under the right
of refusal had the right to unsell it
and did themselves a deal.
Well, you know, we'll take that on the chin, but,
but it was, you know, a, an apartment building
with a hundred units in CBD Wellington order have been
selling for, you know, 50 to a hundred million.
So that, that's just telling you what the risks
that party is taking on
very unknown risks around that building. Yeah.
But yeah, 'cause it,
I think it was like two weeks after it was sold and wep it pretty
Hard to the market by the way.
Yeah. Just, just the team
and I have done a lot of soul searching on the
would we do it it differently?
Um, was it a commercially robust thing?
And, and on balance, I think we still believe it is.
And for clarity, the party they onsold it to
was their bill partner that we were effectively kind
of co negotiating with.
Um, so it wasn't some other random, so we did a lot
of market testing of other developers
and to be honest with you, there was very little interest
because of the scale of risk that Simon just talked about.
So really we were negotiating with the Iwi
and their build partner
and we had a call on do we actually put it out to market
and then if there isn't any interest, maybe they come back
and even drop their price or do we just go And in the end we
made the decision and they assured us they were gonna
hold onto it and develop it.
In the end we made the decision to go with it
and then they in turned to a deal
with their developer partner and on sold it to them.
It wasn't some random
Party solution. Yeah,
yeah. But they were able to unsell it for
so much more than you sold it for.
'cause they knew that the earthquake prone
building standards were about to change.
So did we, are
You, we Knew, are you guys like not in touch with No,
We, we totally, we totally knew that.
Right. But the, but the only, the only other party
who was interested was
the one that was already their partner.
So we couldn't, now in hindsight, should we have taken it
to the open market line call, right.
Given the nature of the RFR process.
Um, but we think at the end of the day, you know,
even though, you know, we forgo for
forgo a couple of million dollars there,
that's a good outcome for Wellington that
that's gonna get developed
and something's gonna happen with it,
But it's a loss of public housing.
So that's gonna get developed into private housing. Yeah.
But there's no way that we could, there is no way
that we could, we'd looked at it every which way
and the risks in developing that were not appropriate risks
for, um, for a public housing provider like
us to take on board.
And we're better off to exit that,
get it back into the market
and focus on other developments, including some
that you've mentioned earlier that we've been focusing
on. Yeah. So
How's that going?
Well, I think the minister's answered that.
No, he didn't actually, he didn't answer the question.
That's why we have nothing
To add to. Didn't
wanna, is we,
Because that, so that can sense expiring soon for,
um, for Arlington.
So what's gonna have, 'cause that's $50 million
of taxpayer's money down the drain.
We have nothing to add to what the minister said.
We'll have to sit behind my
New question, Jamie.
Uh, 78,000 homes, uh, 200,000 occupants.
What are they saying about service?
Uh, what, what are they saying about KO
and uh, um, obviously half
of those people are in house stock
that is older than 1986.
So is there a difference between people living in
that generation home or the new ones?
Uh, well, I'd firstly say, uh,
as we touched on at the start,
and we get a quarterly pretty comprehensive customer
satisfaction across a whole bunch of dimensions from how,
how happy they are with satisfied they are with the house,
with the tenant managers, um, with maintenance, quality
of maintenance, timeliness, um, a number,
uh, safety in the host.
And those have pretty well across the board been improving.
So, uh, those are improving.
There is no doubt that, um,
all our tenants aren't a hundred
percent happy with their houses.
Right. And obviously the ones that are in the older ones,
uh, uh, are less happy than ones that just went into a,
a brand new one or et cetera.
And, you know, we put a lot
of work into getting everything up
to healthy home standards, et cetera.
So we've made them better.
But there's still, you don't get the same thermal
efficiencies from a 60-year-old, um,
house than you do from a, a contemporary one
with double glazing, et cetera.
Um, so I think it, it, it does vary.
I mean, we also, when you've got that many tenants, some
of 'em get frustrated with their tenancy managers,
their neighbors, et cetera.
Um, but I think overall, you know, there's a sort
of a misperception that Kang Aurora is full of noisy,
disruptive, ungrateful people.
That's not the case at all. The vast, vast, vast majority
of them are good kiwis living their lives.
They're good tenants.
Um, they're thankful for what they have, um, received, pay
Their rent you need a general appreciation
of being in those homes.
Sorry, a general appreciation. Yes,
Yes, yes. Very,
very well. And I think what's really important is on
the, and this is where the, the change to being,
having firmer boundaries on disruptive behavior
and rent arrears is now that people are seeing us follow
through on that, people are taking it seriously.
They don't want to lose their home.
And so the vast majority of people,
we issue a formal section 55 a notice
to course correct their behavior and everything's okay.
And I think as Simon touched on the ones that we,
we end up too many almost always refuse to engage.
So we're trying to get 'em support
and they won't even talk to us.
Sometimes they're, they're not even in the dwelling.
So, uh, and the,
and the numbers of that are quite small in comparison
to the, to the overall size.
So, so I, I think there's a lot of misperceptions around
tenants and, and the vast majority of 'em are good people
who are very thankful for
what they've, the support they're getting.
Your question, Karen. Thank you.
Um, when the, uh, reset was announced
and the sale of Kaira homes was signaled,
there was an indication that, uh,
when houses are sold in a particular region that would be
used to fund regeneration in that region.
But that hasn't played out that way, has it?
Can you explain? That wasn't something we ever said.
No, no, it wasn't. But, um, you go by
what the minister said,
but that hasn't been reflected in any instructions
that the minister's provided you.
Uh, we, we, we do the renewals where we're asked
to do the renewals, um, by, by hud.
Um, and they broadly line up with the same areas
where we're selling things, but not one-to-one.
And you, you know, I think they're making to,
as the minister, you probably should ask hu the question,
but as the minister said,
looking at the right housing in the right places in the
right thing and in in places that I suspect means
decreasing in other places, it means increasing.
Um, for example, in Auckland there was a,
we over delivered on targets over the last
three years or so.
And now maybe there's a bit of a course correction.
But you're best to ask HUD how they approach that.
'cause we just build a
renewals where we're asked to do them. That's
Right. So what
I'm trying to understand is that we know
that in your letter of expectation, there was
that adjustment in Auckland, there was a reduction, uh,
in the number of houses, uh, you were asked
to provide in Auckland.
And we also know that in places like Invercargill,
there are sales way, but there's no plans to build an cargo.
So how many areas
are you currently selling or have sold
but don't have a build program scheduled in those areas?
Uh, uh, we will have to come back
to you on the details we don't have to hand. Yep,
That'd be useful. If you could
please. Thank you.
Well, in that case, I'll let that one go since
so can go. Cheers.
Great. I, I might ask sort of a loosely related, uh,
question to that is, I note that in 20 24, 25 delivered,
was it 3,456 new homes, uh, exceeding, exceeded the,
was revised target of four 3,410 by minister August, um,
2024 there of expectations.
And you introduced regional targets, um, I think meet,
meet those in eight out of 12.
Um, can you just walk us through a little bit about, um,
how you exceeded the, uh, letter of expectations, um,
and in terms of those builds
and what, um, you know, in terms of the regions that you're,
uh, meeting the, the schedule Yeah, sure.
What's, what's working and, and what, you know Yeah.
What we, where you could, um, improve in the before.
Yeah. So I think, um, on the, on the, uh, what's worked
for us is that I think that new housing delivery system
that we've placed, bringing that, um, repeatability
to it has been helpful.
The optimized plans.
And I think, you know, we are building, you know, for,
for clarity, the reset builds on a ton of great work
that Kanga did, building its build capability.
It's not like we've magically built all this
capability in the last 18 months.
We've just taken what was there, refined it
and got a lot more cost effective and more cost focused.
Um, so I think, um, that's the heart of what allowed us
to deliver overall where, where we've missed, uh,
it's tended to be by relatively marginal amounts
that within a few months we've been able to deliver.
But it varies by particular geography.
Um, uh,
and in, in some places it can be, you know,
there was a relatively big development
that didn't quite get the consents that we needed
to get over the line in time
in places like I think it's Gisborne.
Um, there's like one, I think there's one person
who does the utility connections or something like that.
So you, you, when you're ramping up,
you encounter some supply chain pinch points
that you didn't quite, um, expect.
Um, so it varies.
And we, you know, we try
and of course correct to, to do that and look,
and we've delivered a lot in Gisborne in the last while.
It's just that quite a few of them delivered
after the June 30 date and not before.
And, and if, if there's one thing we would encourage the,
the, the, the committee to do is, particularly
with us in this sort of whole 78,000, like we're trying
to move to a more consistent delivery.
But the year end target, if there's the demos or the sales
and the builders slightly out of whack, you can be out
by a hundred or 200, um, to
not over freak out on that.
And what we assure you is that
with the improved utilization rate, which as I said,
if we can hold where we're at currently is like 600 more
tenants at houses, that is more than making up
for any shortfall in any given month.
Um, so that's probably the Yeah,
Yeah. We're asking the
minister to keep us in a,
have a arranged target
because just on any day of the week, you've always,
you've always got houses out of service
because they're, you know, they're between tenants,
they've been renovated, they've,
they've been prepared for sale.
So, and that number moves around a bit.
We've, you get a lot of deli, we get a lot
of deliveries in the last two months of the financial year.
Currently we can only commit to build an annual basis.
So we've asked the minister to consider longer term
delegations so that we can smooth that.
But if you look at our delivery profile, about 70%
of all our new, new homes get delivered in the last quarter.
So, which is, you know, April, may, June.
It's not a, it's not a very effective way
to run the organization.
We were much better, they were being delivered in a more
consistent pipeline through the year.
So we, we are working on, um, on, on that with the minister
and heart around how we get the delegations to allow us
to do that better and that will smooth this problem.
But right now it, it causes the problem
'cause we have to unload a whole lot
and then, uh,
then we get them all delivered back in the last three
months, you know? Yeah.
But again, just to stress for the members,
like it's not like we don't care or anything.
It's like we are absolutely working hard to make sure
that the houses we've got are housing
as many whanau in need as possible.
And you know, that's where that utilization focus,
you can continue to see as some Yeah.
Staying on that. But we will get,
particularly on any given day,
there'll be some ups and downs that
Just cost effectiveness point.
I, I don't, I sort of made a quick note.
I might want not be precisely right,
but I think you said your,
your bill cost per square meter was about $3,743,
Three 4,000 Around there, dropped it 3,209.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Lemme get you the correct figures.
So in FY 24,
the average bill cost was $3,473 per square meter.
And for clarity, that's across non apartment apologies
and it's foundations up, it doesn't include the land cost.
And at the moment we are, you know, it's not just,
we hope it's like the rates we have contracted on the homes
that will actually deliver over the next, the rest
of this financial year give us confidence
that we'll be down at 2,980 or lower.
And, and what was that previously?
Yeah, it was previously 3,473.
So it's about 15% lower by the end of this year.
And we think we can keep it going down lower now,
eventually the build cycle will turn
and we will run outta steam on that,
but we think there's more, there's more opportunity
as we optimize what we're building.
It's partly optimization
and being buyer
of construction services is a more favorable
market as a buyer right now.
So there's, there's a lot of people looking for work.
So that's, that's not,
we're getting some help from the market
and eventually, you know, construction cycles turn,
so that'll, that'll apply some pressure.
So there's still work going on
to further reduce that number.
And even 2,900 is a full trailing 12 month. Yeah.
Correct. Yeah. Well, we're confident we can,
We're contracting lower than that.
That's what the 12 month view will be.
So we're still tracking down. Yeah,
We're, we're currently contracting quite commonly 30%
below what it was in FY 24 on a unit basis.
So it is a substantial improvement.
And, and look, you know,
we didn't mention it explicitly today,
but we put out a quarterly scorecard which has this on it.
So every quarter will just report on
how we're going against this end
utilization and the other key things. So
In a previous, um, hearing, uh, we've had had, uh,
with Kyle, look before your time, uh, we, we heard
that the cost per square meter
build was higher than the private sector.
That's right. Um, where, where does that sit now?
When when we did the reset plan work, which was, you know,
the, the preparatory work, we came to the conclusion
that we were in for conventional housing
around 12% above.
It's very hard to do true apples for apples comparison,
but we, we came to, we were around 12%
above market.
So with the sort of reduction you hearing about here,
we are confident we are moving to at or below market. Yeah.
Sovereign morning. Yeah. Um, just to suck on that.
Um, and there's been no compromise on quality.
Yeah, no, we don't believe so.
Um, we, uh, those standardized design,
the feedback we're getting from
customers is really positive.
Um, we're picking that up
and like if there's some things
that could be a bit different, then
we're, we're tweaking it.
And we're also looking at
what are some relatively marginal cost add-backs
for some aesthetic tr change up so that you kind
of make it blend into the communities.
I mean, to call it out explicitly, we, you know,
there's people go well, they look boxy
and they, you know, um, and they are a little bit boxy,
but the tenants themselves inside it,
the living space is actually better
And more Flow and with good windows
and all the good things that are there.
Um, and so we don't believe that we're,
and they're, they're just as good quality in terms
of thermal insulation, et cetera, et cetera.
So we don't believe that we're, they aren't always
as beautiful as they were, if I'm honest.
You know, there was some truly stunning developments
that were there, but I I, for me personally, I trade off
that perfection for housing more people
Better than a studio motel. Yeah,
A Lot. Yeah. And so they,
I mean the, the customer feedback is the,
is the, is the rubber hits the road on it on that one,
and it's been really positive on the optimized designs.
Great. Supplementary ki
Thank you. Um,
I'm keen to understand
why you compare the cost of the per unit that you deliver
to the market as opposed to community housing providers,
given that the market doesn't tend to provide for
disabled people, of which 70% of your tenants identify as,
uh, they, the market doesn't tend
to work on an accessibility proportion,
whereas community housing providers are much more aligned
with your client base.
We look, we, we've tried to t we've tried to take that
rhetoric out of play essentially
because it's just a common criticism that
we build stuff way too expensive.
That's, so we, we try to use this market view to,
if we can dispel the idea that then we actually get into,
you know, a cleaner conversation, we're just not getting,
uh, pressured on that, that the, we do a house,
we do have things that cost more actually we,
we have higher focus on safety.
We, we, uh, use more durable
interior fittings like solid door, not a hollow door,
or we, we use things with a more of a lifetime value.
We, we are not like a conventional developer who's quite
happy to sell you something
and knowing that the kitchen will be completely replacing
the kitchen because all the cabinet will blow
with the water damage and things in 10 years.
We don't, we don't agree.
So we spend, you know, a bit more,
but we have got massive scale.
So our, our objective is to get those
add-ons and still deliver at around the market price
because we are, we are sourcing thousands a year.
So that's our objective.
We may or may not be able to pull it off long run,
but so far I say we are, we are on track for that.
Well, you've added context
to the point that I was trying to make Yeah.
Is that you are required to build houses
that the market is not.
That's Right. And you are making, I think,
notable progress in reducing costs,
but there will be an inherent, um, requirement on you
and community housing providers
that the market doesn't have to deliver.
That's right. I touched on yeah, accessibility, safety,
safety, unity. That's right. Can we talk
About the accessibility proportion now?
There was a, there was a requirement that, um,
a certain percentage
of new builds did meet accessibility standards.
Can you talk us through where you're at with
that and whether you're still meeting that? Yeah,
We're gonna get Nick to speak to this of his,
The, uh, when we were expanding the portfolio,
we had a target of 15%, um, for full universal design.
Since we've moved to a renewal strategy, we are looking
to build full, full universal design where the site sort
of allows, um, us to and good sense to do so.
And we're building as many full many
as many universal design features as we can
into our properties, as in our standard designs.
And in those optimized designs you just heard about the, uh,
so that's the, that's
the approach we're taking at the moment.
What we haven't done is put a target on it
because we're kind of renewing our,
our existing portfolio at the
Moment. Yeah. Accessibility.
Accessibility is in all the standard design
or so Yeah, no, there,
there is not a percentage target of. Okay.
So that's been dropped. That's correct.
Because we're not expanding our portfolio at the moment.
Yep. Understood. So that was only for the expansion.
Now they're no longer expanding.
You are building new,
but there's no longer a requirement of a,
a certain percentage of accessibility on those new homes.
We don't have a target, but we are building
accessibility features into houses every single day.
Understood. So what's your proportion now then,
regardless in terms of, well you don't have a target,
but you're saying you're still building accessibility, uh,
elements into those builds.
So what proportion are accessible incorporating those?
In the year that we've just in review, I think we achieved
14% of that 15% target,
which is the last year we were
reporting against that target.
We'd have to go and gather the
information from for the first quarter.
Yeah, that'd be good if you could do that. Yeah, we can do
That. I think that's
in two layers.
What are the standard accessibility things we think
about in all designs?
Yep. And what is the univers full universal on a like
for like Yeah, so I think we can help you understand
what do we do as standard in pretty much all development,
including retrofit.
We, we can build a lot of those if
You could and break it between you and retrofit.
That would be really useful. Thank you. We'll, we'll, we'll,
Yeah. Look, I'm, I'm
gonna circle back
to the question you said wasn't for you,
but this is where it, it hits the road, right?
If you don't know how many people out there need KO housing
that are disabled or elderly, most
of those people are gonna need the same things
then are you building the right houses?
Given that you've told me like the chips are doing this
stuff over here, that's more niche.
You are the kind of mass producer. Have you got those?
Can you assure me you've got the settings right on that.
If that's not, have you got
that information? Do you know what decades
Of experience? So,
you know, we understand, I
Mean yeah, we, we obviously build
to the public housing plan,
but I think it's important to remember
that people were placing off the waiting list,
we're placing into homes
that open up across a whole portfolio.
So about 40% of our portfolio has some degree
of accessibility modifications, uh, made to it.
So, and we can modify that further
through processes we have in place
with a CC and Ministry of Health.
You can put in a ramp, We can put in a ramp,
we can do modifications to meet specific customer needs
for those that were housing off the waiting list,
people tend to focus on what we're building.
Remembering that we've got, you know, a huge portfolio
that is turning over every week.
And that's where a lot of the, that's
where we're housing most of our people. Yeah,
I think, and I think the figure is, we've got about 40%
of our homes have some form of accessibility,
um, feature in it.
New question, Maureen. Oh no, I've done mine.
Oh that is, thank you. Alright,
New question Helen.
Okay. Oh, just, I just wanna get to grips with this.
In my community we are gonna have a whole lot more
affordable housing hopefully built.
So you are going to have a more niche market in some ways
because there'll be a whole lot of people who can afford
to rent their own homes or buy their own homes.
So how do you know what you are doing in the future?
Appreciate 40% of them are accessible.
How do you know you are building the right things?
Because something like, we had that discussion earlier about
how many people need single dwells now.
Single. They, they're single.
And we've got a lot of older women coming into that market
who do not have houses
because they have, they've been locked out
of the housing market, they're coming to you.
How do you know how many are coming to you?
Yeah. So I again just, uh, we touched on it before,
but we do look at our, um, current
and expected, um, needs in the sort of social housing space
and the kind of needs that tenants would have,
but that macro view of what's going on with the population
and where they are, et cetera, as part of what HUD
Reviews and I know that they, are they telling you?
Are they they are they saying actually, Kay,
you need to build Yes.
This many and you've gotta do it
and you work to their designs.
Are they the lead on that?
Yes, they're getting better at it. Yes, correct.
And yes, correct. And um, we are doing the designs,
but they tell us that we're gonna need these kind of,
these kind of needs with these sort of typologies of houses
and these kind of geographies
and they're out, how to provide that
as efficiently as we can.
And then if what's in the current plan,
there's a shortfall we see
and Simon raised the example of the one bedroom,
then we'll raise that part.
We'll go, oh, okay, that's,
and then we work together to adjust the
'cause we had, there was a financial incentive problem
that got in the way of us building as many one bedrooms
as we probably should.
'cause it doesn't cost a lot more to build two bedroom
that much more to build two
bedrooms, but, and you get a lot more rent.
Yeah. So it was kind of, if you just were solving
for our financial incentives,
then we wouldn't build money, we wouldn't do it.
And so we've worked with hard to fix that. So
That's strong relationships between you and hu.
Yeah. Um, can I just ask about Wesley, um,
when is that going to happen?
Because you just said it's on the back
burner, but is there a plan?
Because we've got a school there
that's got one 20 children in it and it's really run down
and they actually,
the principal moved in there thinking she was gonna be
involved in a really big school
and in fact it's a sinking school.
Uh, IIII can't answer that question.
And at the moment, um, at the,
that funding was diverted from half
and it's another one of those decisions that
huden ultimately the, the government will make in terms of,
um, where do those different LSPs fit
and what's an appropriate funding to put into it.
Uh, at the moment we've dialed that one back.
We're still going strong on Roskill and Northco
and are about to submit, um, some business cases.
Um, I can't give you any more detail on,
So is that, are we talking 10 years, five years, 20 years?
You'll have to ask hu if I have any insights into that.
I'm afraid. Like, 'cause we, we,
we can't progress at the scale that we had without a,
we can, this is an example where you need funding from the,
from the house, the housing acceleration fund.
Um, we can't make the numbers work
to do it just off our own balance sheet.
Um, and so that's one that,
and again, I guess, you know, HUD's making decisions on
where, around the motto and on what they're investing it on.
And at the moment those were some decisions that, um,
the money's going elsewhere,
including into chips, et cetera.
But you best to ask hu those
'cause those are driven decisions.
New question ki Thank you. Localized one.
Um, we, you'll be aware that Kura came back to
and the Tara district for the first time in over 20 years.
Um, and some of those developments were completed,
but there were also some scheduled developments.
Are you able to confirm if any
of those developments have been canceled?
If they have been, they'll be in the list.
It was published on the website.
We, we, I don't have That I to say that actually.
'cause I went to go and look at that list
this morning and it had been taken down.
So I was, I was, if I was able to access that,
I wouldn't have been, unless the, the link has changed
and it's, but it does say no longer available.
Um, and okay, well
That must be temporary 'cause there's not been decision
to, I I'm sure it's not. We are happy with transcript,
So we can't answer your question. Now
I'm sure it's not on purpose, but incidentally I couldn't
find that out this morning.
So if, um, if you can't answer it now,
if you could please let me know, that would be good. Yeah,
Well Do we, our, our stance on sort
of development site is to be quite open about them
and sort of have a, have that on the website at all times.
What developments are progressing roughly,
timing, et cetera.
And what I would say and,
and we've been very clear about ones
that have been stopped and are being sold.
So Yeah, sure. We just made that available.
So it's not, there's no attempt to hide
That information. No,
I, I'm sure that is the case.
The, um, yeah, just so you're fully aware that we've got a,
a response back from the minister with a link to a list
of all the canceled mm-hmm.
Projects. Yeah. And when you click that link,
it says page not found.
I think what's probable happen is
that it's the link has either changed or whatever.
Right. I'm sure you're not trying to hide it from
It. No, no. We'll get you
the right link
and make, make sure it's up.
So thank you. We wanted
to be transparent on which project were
going ahead, which ones weren't. Team have got
Minister might have spelled it wrong, he said Maureen.
Fair enough.
I I won't take the opportunity
to ask a localized question as well.
So can we bit of time on our hands. Um, we are not very good
On the localized.
Do, do, do miss, um, um, you,
I appreciate have all the information about the hands
more national level, but, but just looking in, in my region,
um, uh, rips in the south
and Electric know that kind water has made a decision
to build and gore, for example,
and that had been put on the back burner, uh, for some time.
Uh, that, that's promising.
Um, there's, um,
but my, my my broader point is that, um, in, in land targa,
which is I I, a good chunk of that has no presence.
Um, and the work is done by chips.
Um, I'm just interested in, in,
when you're thinking about allocating your resources across
the country, where you are thinking is in terms of
what chips are doing, um,
and whether there's any, any, um, you know, work for you
to do or for kind what to do to support that work
or to um, uh, you know, focus on what, on, on anything
where you could value add in that property.
It's, it's a difficult market.
Uh, the property is about range between 12 to 14 in terms
of the affordable index,
which is about double the national index.
Mm-hmm. Um, but we do have a population group.
Um, but the average annual income is about $10,000 lower
than the average, but it's
generally falls of the wealthy area.
So it doesn't register on the radar generally
for these top conversations.
Yeah. But I'm wondering if things like
that comes onto your radar
and terms your, your national, uh, dashboard
From a, from a board perspective, I think we've,
we've got a business which I,
and really is business that provides it is,
it's why it's been so responsive to the techniques
that we have around how to, how to make them more efficient.
'cause it's a, it's a pretty straightforward operating.
We invest in houses, we earn rent
and we, we, we, we look after people.
So it's just, you can think
of it in a very business-like way.
It's, we we're more attuned to a, to a scale operation.
And our,
our model has significant dis economies once you start
applying it in remote locations and smaller centers.
So you certainly wouldn't have a board
rushing toward building more small pockets of housing in
rural or very low small area that, that would, we would see
that as a better, a job done better by those communities,
iwi, you know, the the people in those areas.
So that, that for, for me would be a, you know,
a pretty strong steer that you wouldn't expect us
to go though to those places.
No, I just go, gore is a small community. Yeah.
Um, but Queensland Lake Central Target isn't. Yeah.
Yeah. It's a, it's one
of the fastest growing populations in, in the country,
but it does have an affordability issue,
particularly you providing housing for people like nurses,
teachers, police officers, I the f**k on
Yours. Yeah.
The market should provide that though really,
you know, you, you shouldn't have
to think about a nurse in a social home that just,
that really makes sense.
That's, that's the, that's the ideal.
I think that's what our minister is trying to aim to, to,
to free up more, more land.
There, there, there is a challenge there though.
Um, good point.
The average, the average value is about $1.7 million, um,
which isn't, isn't in range for people on those,
those low incomes, uh, who are critical for the community.
So there, there is a broader challenge there
and you know, we have the co coincident Lakes Community
Housing trust, which has been doing a very effective job in
providing housing for that.
So it's great to see that being supported. Yeah.
But it's just on sort of on your broader dashboard increase
of that, that register.
I don't, I, yeah, it's hard to imagine
that those folk turning up at the top
of the housing register.
I just, that's hard to imagine.
Can I, can I stop on that in terms of, I'm curious about,
we've talked a little bit about the chips
and the different kinds of criteria that they can apply
and that you are constrained in some ways
by the fact you're doing these broad projects,
but also by the fact you have to go for high needs people
and it constrain how, constrains how much you can create
communities that are easy, um, et cetera.
Can you just tell me, do you think
that we've got the settings right for the work
that you are doing in that way to allow for, um,
unusual situations like the Lakes District
where the prices are just so high
or, um, the fact that, that there are communities pockets
where we need to look after people?
Do we have those settings right?
Seems like you are throwing a lot
of stuff over to the chips.
Well, no, no.
We just, it's a, it's, again,
I know you don't like this answer,
but it hard's job to resolve the housing system.
We, we, you know, we are the delivery arm
for government in the houses, you know,
that we've been asked to, to put together.
So, um, you know, could we build homes in Queenstown
and uh, and earn a rent on them?
Absolutely. We could, we probably get quite a high rent
because the market rents would be high,
but are we the right is, is that the right answer?
I think that's a, that's a, that's the bigger issue
for government to, and,
and, you know, w wouldn't the stronger answer be
to provide encouragement for the private sector
to solve the problem of affordable rentals for workers.
That, that, that,
that doesn't seem like a social housing problem.
That seems like a, a different issue.
I think it's a pretty social housing if people are living
in their cars in Queenstown, which they are.
I see. I've seen what I've got to say.
We, we we do the job we're after. Yeah. Yeah.
Alright, well I think, um,
I don't have any bids for any more questions. Um, all my
Remaining questions are for hard and fairness, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. That list
Is now live on the website,
so we'll send you another link.
Thank you. I appreciate it. Fixed already. Look at that.
There's a, there's a respons department. Unfortunately
We had some of the comms team here
obviously fix that in the background.
So I did see feedback
and I did think, I hope that's my link.
Yeah, if you can't find the site,
you can't find the sites you're looking for,
just let us know
and we'll, yeah, I'll, I'll have a crack at the link.
Thanks very much. So thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, it's, um, impressive what you have achieved.
Um, and um, good luck with the future.
Thanks for last period. Full me Christmas. Thank you.
Yeah, cheer. Thank you.
Thank you VO for the best new role too.
Yeah, my new non role.